Psalm LXXVIII · Part 2 of 4
9. But what that is which he saith, “they have been turned back in the day of war,” the following words do teach, wherein he hath most clearly explained this: “they have not kept,” he saith, “the testament of God, and in His law they would not walk” (ver. 10). Behold what is, “they have been turned back in the day of war:” they have not kept the testament of God. When they were bending and shooting bows, they did also utter the words of most forward promise, saying, “Whatsoever things the Lord our God hath spoken we will do, and we will hear.” “They have been turned back in the day of war:” because the promise of obedience not hearing but temptation doth prove. But he whose spirit hath been trusted with God, keepeth hold on God, who is faithful, and “doth not suffer him to be tempted above that which he is able; but will make with the temptation a way of escape also,” that he may be able to endure, and may not be turned back in the day of war.…Therefore these men have been thus branded: “a generation,” he saith, “which hath not directed their heart.” It hath not been said, works, but heart. For when the heart is directed, the works are right; but when the heart is not directed, the works are not right, even though they seem to be right. And how the crooked generation hath not directed the heart, hath sufficiently been shown, when he saith, “and the spirit thereof hath not been trusted with God.” For God is right: and therefore by cleaving to the right, as to an immutable rule, the heart of a man can be made right, which in itself was crooked.…
10. “And they forgat His benefits, and the wonderful works of Him which He showed to them; before their fathers the wonderful things which He did” (ver. 11). What this is, is not a question to be negligently passed over. Concerning those very fathers he was speaking a little before, that they had been a generation crooked and embittering.…What fathers, inasmuch as these are the very fathers, whom he would not have posterity to be like? If we shall take them to be those out of whom the others had derived their being, for example, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, by this time they had long since fallen asleep, when God showed wonderful things in Egypt. For there followeth, “in the land of Egypt, in the plain of Thanis” (ver. 12): where it is said that God showed to them wonderful things before their fathers. Were they perchance present in spirit? For of the same the Lord saith in the Gospel, “for all do live to Him.” Or do we more suitably understand thereby the fathers Moses and Aaron, and the other elders who are related in the same Scripture also to have received the Spirit, of which also Moses received, in order that they might aid him in ruling and bearing the same people? For why should they not have been called fathers? It is not in the same manner as God is the One Father, who doth regenerate with His Spirit those whom He doth make sons for an everlasting inheritance; but it is for the sake of honour, because of their age and kindly carefulness: just as Paul the elder saith, “Not to confound you I am writing these things, but as my dearly beloved sons I am admonishing you:” though he knew of a truth that it had been said by the Lord, “Call ye no man your father on earth, for One is your Father, even God.” And this was not said in order that this term of human honour should be erased from our usual way of speaking: but lest the grace of God whereby we are regenerated unto eternal life, should be ascribed either to the power or even sanctity of any man. Therefore when he said, “I have begotten you;” he first said, “in Christ,” and “through the Gospel;” lest that might be thought to be of him, which is of God.…Accordingly, the land of Egypt must be understood for a figure of this world. “The plain of Thanis” is the smooth surface of lowly commandment. For lowly commandment is the interpretation of Thanis. In this world therefore let us receive the commandment of humility, in order that in another world we may merit to receive the exaltation which He hath promised, who for our sake here became lowly.
11. For He that “did burst asunder the sea and made them go through, did confine the waters as it were in bottles” (ver. 13), in order that the water might stand up first as if it were shut in, is able by His grace to restrain the flowing and ebbing tides of carnal desires, when we renounce this world, so that all sins having been thoroughly washed away, as if they were enemies, the people of the faithful may be made to pass through by means of the Sacrament of Baptism. He that “led them home in the cloud of the day, and in the whole of the night in the illumination of fire” (ver. 14), is able also spiritually to direct goings if faith crieth to Him, “Direct Thou my goings after Thy word.” Of Whom in another place is said, “For Himself shall make thy courses right, and shall prolong thy goings in peace” through Jesus Christ our Lord, whose Sacrament in this world, as it were in the day, is manifest in the flesh, as if in a cloud; but in the Judgment it will be manifest like as in a terror by night; for then there will be a great tribulation of the world like as it were fire, and it shall shine for the just and shall burn for the unjust. “He that burst asunder the rock in the desert, and gave them water as in a great deep” (ver. 15); “and brought out water from the rock, and brought down waters like rivers” (ver. 16), is surely able upon thirsty faith to pour the gift of the Holy Spirit (the which gift the performance of that thing did spiritually signify), to pour, I say, from the Spiritual Rock that followed, which is Christ: who did stand and cry, “If any is athirst, let him come to Me:” and, “he that shall have drunk of the water which I shall give, rivers of living water shall flow out of his bosom.” For this He spake, as is read in the Gospel, to the Spirit, which they were to receive that believed in Him, unto whom like the rod drew near the wood of the Passion, in order that there might flow forth grace for believers.
12. And yet, “they,” like a generation crooked and embittering, “added yet to sin against Him” (ver. 17): that is, not to believe. For this is the sin, whereof the Spirit doth convict the world, as the Lord saith, “Of sin indeed because they have not believed on Me.” “And they exasperated the Most High in drought,” which other copies have, “in a place without water,” which is a more exact translation from the Greek, and doth signify no other thing than drought. Was it in that drought of the desert, or rather in their own? For although they had drank of the rock, they had not their bellies but their minds dry, freshening with no fruitfulness of righteousness. In that drought they ought the more faithfully to have been suppliant unto God, in order that He who had given fulness unto their jaws, might give also equity to their manners. For unto him the faithful soul doth cry, “Let mine eyes see equity.”
13. “And they tempted God in their hearts, in order that they might seek morsels for their souls” (ver. 18). It is one thing to ask in believing, another thing in tempting. Lastly there followeth, “And they slandered God, and said, Shall God be able to prepare a table in the desert?” (ver. 19). “For He smote the rock, and the waters flowed, and torrents gushed forth: will He be able to give bread also, or to prepare a table for His people?” (ver. 20). Not believing therefore, they sought morsels for their souls. Not so the Apostle James doth enjoin a morsel to be asked for the mind, but doth admonish that it be sought by believers, not by such as tempt and slander God. “But if any one of you,” he saith, “doth lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who doth give to all men abundantly, and doth not upbraid, and it shall be given to him: but let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.” This faith had not that generation which “had not directed their heart, and the spirit thereof had not been trusted with God.”
14. “Wherefore the Lord heard, and He delayed, and fire was lighted in Jacob, and wrath went up into Israel” (ver. 21). He hath explained what he hath called fire. He hath called anger fire: although in strict propriety fire did also burn up many men. What is therefore this that he saith, “The Lord heard, and He delayed”? Did He delay to conduct them into the land of promise, whither they were being led: which might have been done in the space of a few days, but on account of sins they must needs be wasted in the desert, where also they were wasted during forty years? And if this be so, He did then delay the people, not those very persons who tempted and slandered God: for they all perished in the desert, and their children journeyed into the land of promise. Or did He delay punishment, in order that He might first satisfy unbelieving concupiscence, lest He might be supposed to be angry, because they were asking of Him what He was not able to do? “He heard,” then, “and He delayed to avenge:” and after He had done what they supposed He was not able to do, then “anger went up upon Israel.”
15. Lastly, when both these things have been briefly touched, afterwards he is evidently following out the order of the narrative. “Because they believed not in God, nor hoped in His saving health” (ver. 22). For when he had told why fire was lighted in Jacob, and anger went up upon Israel, that is to say, “because they believed not in God, nor hoped in His saving health:” immediately subjoining the evident blessings for which they were ungrateful, he saith, “and He commanded the clouds above, and opened the doors of Heaven” (ver. 23). “And He rained upon them manna to eat, and gave them bread of Heaven” (ver. 24). “Bread of angels man did eat: dainties He sent them in abundance” (ver. 25). He brought over the South Wind from Heaven, and in His virtue He led in the South West Wind” (ver. 26). “And He rained upon them fleshes like dust, and winged fowls like the sand of the sea” (ver. 27). “And they fell in the midst of their camp, around their tabernacles” (ver. 28). “And they ate and were filled exceedingly; and their desire He brought to them: they were not deprived of their desire” (ver. 29). Behold why He had delayed. But what He had delayed let us hear. “Yet the morsel was in their mouths, and the anger of God came down upon them” (ver. 30). Behold what He had delayed. For before “He delayed:” and afterwards, “fire was lighted in Jacob and anger went up upon Israel.” He had delayed therefore in order that He might first do what they had believed that He could not do, and then might bring upon them what they deserved to suffer. For if they placed their hope in God, not only would their desires of the flesh but also those of the spirit have been fulfilled. For he that…“opened the doors of Heaven, and rained upon them manna to eat,” that He might fill the unbelieving, is not without power to give to believers Himself the true Bread from Heaven, which the manna did signify: which is indeed the food of Angels, whom being incorruptible the Word of God doth incorruptibly feed: the which in order that man might eat, He became flesh, and dwelled in us. For Himself the Bread by means of the Evangelical clouds is being rained over the whole world, and, the hearts of preachers like heavenly doors, being opened, is being preached not to a murmuring and tempting synagogue, but to a Church believing and putting hope in Him. He is able also to feed the feeble faith of such as tempt not, but believe, with the signs of words uttered by the flesh and speeding through the air, as though it were fowls: not however with such as come from the north, where cold and mist do prevail, that is to say, eloquence which is pleasing to this world, but by bringing over the South Wind from Heaven; whither, except to the earth? In order that they who are feeble in faith, by hearing things earthly may be nourished up to receive things heavenly.…
16. But as to unbelievers, being a crooked and embittering generation, as it were, while the morsel was yet in their mouths, “the anger of God went up upon them, and it slew among the most of them” (ver. 31): that is, the most of them, or as some copies have it, “the fat ones of them,” which however in the Greek copies which we had, we did not find. But if this be the truer reading, what else must be understood by “the fat ones of them,” than men mighty in pride, concerning whom is said, “their iniquity shall come forth as if out of fat”? “And the elect of Israel He fettered.” Even there there were elect, with whose faith the generation crooked and embittering was not mixed. But they were fettered, so that they might in no sort profit them for whom they desired that they might provide from a fatherly affection. For what is conferred by human mercy, on those with whom God is angry? Or rather hath He willed it to be understood, how that even the elect were fettered at the same time with them, in order that they who were diverse both in mind and in life, might endure sufferings with them for an example not only of righteousness, but also of patience? For we have learned that holy men were even led captive with sinners for no other reason; since in the Greek copies we read not ἐνεπόδισεν, which is “fettered;” but συνεπόδισεν, which is rather “fettered together with.”
17. But the generation crooked and embittering, “in all these things sinned yet more, and they believed not in His wonderful works” (ver. 32). “And in their days failed in vanity” (ver. 33). Though they might, if they had believed, have had days in truth without failing, with Him to whom hath been said, “Thy years shall not fail.” Therefore, “their days failed in vanity, and their years with haste.” For the whole life of mortal men is hastening, and that which seemeth to be longer is but a vapour of somewhat longer duration.
18. Nevertheless, “when he slew them they sought Him:” not for the sake of eternal life, but fearing to end the vapour too soon. There sought Him then, not indeed those whom He had slain, but they that were afraid of being slain according to the example of them. But the Scripture hath so spoken of them as if they sought God who were slain; because they were one people, and it is spoken as if of one body: “and they returned, and at dawn they came to God” (ver. 34). “And they remembered that God is their Helper, and the High God is their Redeemer” (ver. 35). But all this is for the sake of acquiring temporal good things, and for avoiding temporal evil things. For they that did seek God for the sake of temporal blessings, sought not God indeed, but things. Thus with those God is worshipped with slavish fear, not free love. Thus then God is not worshipped, for that thing is worshipped which is loved. Whence because God is found to be greater and better than all things, He must be loved more than all things, in order that He may be worshipped.
19. Lastly, here let us see the words following: “And they loved Him,” he saith, “in their mouth, and in their tongue they lied unto Him” (ver. 36). “But their heart was not right with Him, and they were not counted faithful in His Testament” (ver. 37). One thing on their tongue, another thing in their heart He found, unto whom the secret things of men are naked, and without any impediment He saw what they loved rather. Therefore the heart is right with God, when it doth seek God for the sake of God. For one thing he desired of the Lord, the same he will require, that he may dwell always in the House of the Lord, and may meditate on the pleasantness of Him. Unto Whom saith the heart of the faithful, I will be filled, not with the flesh-pots of the Egyptians, nor with melons and gourds, and garlick and onions, which a generation crooked and embittering did prefer even to bread celestial, nor with visible manna, and those same winged fowls; but, “I will be filled, when Thy glory shall be made manifest.” For this is the inheritance of the New Testament, wherein they were not counted faithful; whereof however the faith even at that time, when it was veiled, was in the elect, and now, when it hath already been revealed, it is not in many that are called. “For many have been called, but few are elect.” Of such sort therefore was the generation crooked and embittering, even when they were seeming to seek God, loving in mouth, and in tongue lying; but in heart not right with God, while they loved rather those things, for the sake of which they required the help of God.
20. “But He is Himself merciful, and will become propitious to their sins, and He will not destroy them. And He will abound to turn away His anger, and He will not kindle all his anger” (ver. 38). By these words many men promise to themselves impunity for their iniquity from the Divine Mercy, even if they shall have persevered in being such, as that generation is described, “crooked and embittering; which hath not directed their heart, and the spirit thereof hath not been trusted with God:” with whom it is not profitable to agree. For if, to speak in their words, God will perchance not destroy no not even bad men, without doubt He will not destroy good men. Why then do we not rather choose that wherein there is no doubt? For they that lie to Him in their tongue, though their heart doth hold some other thing, do think indeed, and will, even God to be a liar, when He doth menace upon such men eternal punishment. But whilst they do not deceive Him with their lying, He doth not deceive them with speaking the truth. These words therefore of divine sayings, concerning which the crooked generation doth cajole itself, let it not make crooked like its own heart: for even when it is made crooked, they continue right. For at first they may be understood according to that which is written in the Gospel, “that ye may be like your Father who is in the Heavens, who maketh His sun to rise upon good men and evil men, and raineth upon just men and unjust men.” For who could not see, how great is the long-suffering of mercy with which He is sparing evil men? But before the Judgment, He spared then that nation in such sort, that He kindled not all His anger, utterly to root it up and bring it to an end: which thing in His words and in the intercession for their sins of His servant Moses doth evidently appear, where God saith, “Let Me blot them out, and make thee into a great nation:” he intercedeth, being more ready to be blotted out for them than that they should be; knowing that he is doing this before One Merciful, who inasmuch as by no means He would blot out him, would even spare them for his sake. For let us see how greatly He spared, and doth still spare.…
21. In the second place, that we may not seem to do violence to divine words, and lest in the place where there was said, “He will not destroy them,” we should say, “But hereafter He will destroy them:” concerning this very present Psalm let us turn to a very common phrase of the Scripture, whereby this question may be more diligently and more truly solved. Speaking of these same persons a little lower down, when He had made mention of the things which the Egyptians because of them had endured, He saith,…“And He led them unto the mount of His sanctification, the mount which His right hand won. And He cast out from their face the nations, and by lot distributed to them the land in the cord of distribution.” If any one at these words should press a question upon us, and should say, How doth he make mention of all these things as having been bestowed upon them, when the same persons were not led into the land of promise, as were delivered from Egypt, inasmuch as they were dead? What shall we reply but that they were spoken of, because they were the self-same people by means of a succession of sons?…
22. “And He remembered that they are flesh, a spirit going and not returning” (ver. 39). Therefore calling them and pitying them through His grace, He called them back Himself, because of themselves they could not return. For how doth flesh return, “a spirit walking and not turning back,” while a weight of evil deserts doth weigh it down unto the lowest and far places of evil, save through the election of grace?…For thus also is solved this no unimportant question, how it is written in the Proverbs, when the Scripture was speaking of the way of iniquity, “all they that walk in her shall not return.” For it hath been so spoken as if all ungodly men were to be despaired of: but the Scripture did only commend grace; for of himself man is able to walk in that way, but is not able of himself to return, except when called back by grace.
23. I say then of these crooked and embittering persons, “How often they exasperated Him in the desert, and provoked Him to wrath in the waterless place!” (ver. 40). “And they turned themselves and tempted God, and exasperated the Holy One of Israel” (ver. 41). He is repeating that same unbelief of theirs, of which He had made mention above. But the reason of the repetition is, in order that there may be mentioned also the plagues which He inflicted on the Egyptians for their sakes: all which things they certainly ought to have remembered, and not to be ungrateful. Lastly, there followeth what? “They remembered not His hands, in the day when He redeemed them from the hand of the troubler” (ver. 42). And he beginneth to speak of what things He did to the Egyptians: “He set in Egypt His signs, and His prodigies in the plain of Thanis” (ver. 43): “and He turned their rivers into blood, and their showers lest they should drink” (ver. 44), or rather, “the flowings of waters,” as some do better understand by what is written in Greek, τὰ ὀμβρήματα, which in Latin we call scaturigines, waters bubbling from beneath. “He sent upon them the dog-fly, and it ate them up; and the frog, and it destroyed them” (ver. 45). “And He gave their fruit to the mildew, and their labours to the locust” (ver. 46). “And He slew with hail their vineyards, and their mulberry trees with frost” (ver. 47). “And He gave over to the hail their beasts of burden, and their possessions to the fire” (ver. 48). “He sent upon them the anger of His indignation, indignation and anger and tribulation, a visitation through evil angels” (ver. 49). He made a way to the course of His anger, and their beasts of burden He shut up in death (ver. 50). “And He smote every first-born thing in the land of Egypt, the first-fruits of their labours in the tabernacles of Cham” (ver. 51).
