Psalm XXXVIII · Part 2 of 3
From Thee indeed it is not hid; but from many men it is hid. The servant of God sometimes seems to be saying in humility, “And my groaning is not hid from Thee.” Sometimes also he seems to smile. Is then that longing dead in his heart? If however there is the desire within, there is the “groaning” also. It does not always find its way to the ears of man; but it never ceases to sound in the ears of God.
14. “My heart is troubled” (ver. 10). Wherefore is it troubled? “And my courage hath failed me.” Generally something comes upon us on a sudden; the “heart is troubled;” the earth quakes; thunder is sent from Heaven; a formidable attack is made upon us, or a horrible sound heard. Perhaps a lion is seen on the road; the “heart is troubled.” Perhaps robbers lie in wait for us; the “heart is troubled:” we are filled with a panic fear; from every quarter something excites anxiety. Wherefore? Because “my courage hath failed me.” For what would be feared, did that courage still remain unmoved? Whatever bad tidings were brought, whatever threatened us, whatever sound was heard, whatever were to fall, whatever appeared horrible, would inspire no terror. But whence that trouble? “My courage faileth me.” Wherefore hath my courage failed me? “The light of mine eyes also is gone from me.” Thus Adam also could not see “the light of his eyes.” For the “light of his eyes” was God Himself, whom when he had offended, he fled to the shade, and hid himself among the trees of Paradise. He shrunk in alarm from the face of God: and sought the shelter of the trees; thenceforth among the trees he had no more “the light of his eyes,” at which he had been wont to rejoice.…
15. “My lovers;” why should I henceforth speak of my enemies? “My lovers and my neighbours drew nigh, and stood over against me” (ver. 11). Understand this that he saith, “Stood over against me.” For if they stood over against me, they fell against themselves. “My lovers and my neighbours drew nigh and stood over against me.” Let us now recognise the words of the Head speaking; now let our Head in His Passion begin to dawn upon us. Yet again when the Head begins to speak, do not sever the Body from it. If the Head would not separate itself from the words of the Body, should the Body dare to separate itself from the sufferings of the Head? Do thou suffer in Christ’s suffering: for Christ, as it were, sinned in thy infirmity. For just now He spoke of thy sins, as if speaking in His own Person, and called them His own.…To those who wished to be near His exaltation, yet thought not of His humility, He answered and said to them, “Can ye drink of the cup that I shall drink of?” Those sufferings of the Lord then are our sufferings also: and were each individual to serve God well, to keep faith truly, to render to each their dues, and to conduct himself honestly among men, I should like to see if he does not suffer even that which Christ here details in the account of His Passion. “My lovers and my neighbours drew nigh, and stood over against me.”
16. “And my neighbours stood afar off.” Who were the “neighbours” that drew nigh, and who were those who stood afar off? The Jews were “neighbours” because “near kinsmen,” they drew near even when they crucified Him: the Apostles also were His “neighbours;” and they also “stood afar off,” that they might not have to suffer with Him. This may also be understood thus: “My friends,” that is, those who feigned themselves “My friends:” for they feigned themselves His friends, when they said, “We know that Thou teachest the way of God in truth;” when they wished to try Him, whether tribute ought to be paid to Cæsar; when He convinced them out of their own mouth, they wished to seem to be His friends. “But He needed not that any should testify of man, for He Himself knew what was in man;” so that when they spoke unto Him words of friendship, He answered them, “Why tempt ye Me, ye hypocrites?” “My friends and my neighbours” then “drew near and stood over against me, and my neighbours stood afar off.” You understand what I said. I called those neighbours who “drew nigh,” and at the same time “stood afar off.” For they “drew nigh” in the body, but “stood afar off” in their heart. Who were in the body so near to Him as those who lifted Him on the Cross? Who in heart so as those who blasphemed Him? Hear this sort of distance described by the Prophet Isaiah; observe this nearness and distance at one and the same time. “This people honours Me with their lips:” behold, with their body they draw near; “but their heart is far from Me.” The same persons are at the same time “near” and “afar off” also: with their lips they are near, in heart afar off. However, because the Apostles also stood afar off, through fear, we understand it more simply and properly of them; so that we mean by it, that some drew near, and others stood afar off; since even Peter, who had followed more boldly than the rest, was still so far off, that being questioned and alarmed, he thrice denied the Lord, with whom he had promised to “be ready to die.” Who afterwards that, from being afar off, he might be made to draw nigh, heard after the resurrection the question, “Lovest thou Me?” and said, “I love Thee;” and by so saying was brought “nigh,” even as by denying Him, he had become “far off;” till with the threefold confession of love, he had put away from him his threefold denial. “And my neighbours stood afar off.”
17. “They also that sought after my soul were preparing violence against me” (ver. 12). It is now plain who “sought after His soul;” viz. those who had not His soul, in that they were not in His Body. They who were “seeking after His soul,” were far removed from His soul; but they were “seeking it” to destroy it. For His soul may be “sought after” in a right way also. For in another passage He finds fault with some persons, saying, “There is no man to care for My soul.” He finds fault with some for not seeking after His soul; and again, with others for seeking after it. Who is he that seeketh after His soul in the right way? He who imitates His sufferings. Who are they that sought after His soul in the wrong way? Even those who “prepared violence against Him,” and crucified Him.
18. He goes on: “Those who sought after My faults had spoken vanity.” What is, “sought after My faults”? They sought after many things, and found them not. Perhaps He may have meant this: “They sought for criminal charges against me.” For they sought for somewhat to say against Him, and “they found not.” For they were seeking to find evil things to say of “the Good;” crimes of the Innocent; When would they find such things in Him, who had no sin? But because they had to seek for sins in Him who had no sin, it remained for them to invent that which they could not find. Therefore, “those who sought after My faults have spoken vanity,” i.e., untruth, “and imagined deceit all the day long;” that is, they meditated treachery without intermission. You know how atrocious false-witness was borne against the Lord, before He suffered. You know how atrocious false-witness was borne against Him, even after His resurrection. For those soldiers who watched His sepulchre of whom Isaiah spake, “I will appoint the wicked for His burial” (for they were wicked men, and would not speak the truth, and being bribed they disseminated a lie), consider what “vanity” they spake. They also were examined, and they said, “While we slept, His disciples came and stole Him away.” This it is, “to speak vanity.” For if they were sleeping, how could they know what had been done?
19. He saith then, “But I as a deaf man heard not” (ver. 13). He who replied not to what He heard, did, as it were, not hear them. “But I as a deaf man heard not. And I was as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth.” And he repeats the same things again.
“And I became as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs” (ver. 14). As if He had nothing to say unto them, as if He had nothing wherewith to reproach them. Had He not already reproached them for many things? Had He not said many things, and also said, “Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,” and many things besides? Yet when He suffered, He said none of these things; not that He had not what to say, but He waited for them to fulfil all things, and that all the prophecies might be fulfilled of Him, of whom it had been said, “And as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so openeth He not His mouth.” It behoved Him to be silent in His Passion, though not hereafter to be silent in Judgment. For He had come to be judged, then, who was hereafter coming to judge; and who was for this reason to come with great power to judge, that He had been judged in great humility.
20. “For in Thee, O Lord, do I hope; Thou wilt hear, O Lord, my God” (ver. 15). As if it were said to Him, “Wherefore openedst thou not thy mouth? Wherefore didst Thou not say, ‘Refrain’? Wherefore didst Thou not rebuke the unrighteous, while hanging on the Cross?” He goes on and says, “For in Thee, O Lord, do I hope; Thou, O Lord my God, wilt hear.” He warns you what to do, should tribulation haply befall. For you seek to defend yourself, and perhaps your defence is not listened to by any one. Then are you confounded, as if you had lost your cause; because you have none to defend or to bear testimony in your favour. “Keep” but your “innocence” within, where no one can pervert thy cause. False-witness has prevailed against you before men. Will it then prevail before God, where your cause has to be pleaded? When God shall be Judge, there shall be no other witness than your own conscience. In the presence of a just judge, and of your own conscience, fear nothing but your own cause. If you have not a bad cause, you will have no accuser to dread; no false-witness to confute, nor witness to the truth to look for. Do but bring into court a good conscience, that you may say, “For in Thee, O Lord, do I hope; Thou, O Lord my God, wilt hear.”
21. “For I said, Let not mine enemies ever rejoice over me. And when my feet slip, they magnify themselves against me” (ver. 16). Again He returns to the infirmity of His Body: and again the Head takes heed of Its “feet.” The Head is not in such a manner in Heaven, as to forsake what It has on earth; He evidently sees and observes us. For sometimes, as is the way of this life, our feet are “turned aside,” and they slip by falling into some sin; there the tongues of the enemy rise up with the bitterest malignity. From this then we discern what they really had in view, even while they kept silence. Then they speak with an unsparing harshness; rejoicing to have discovered what they ought to have grieved for. “And I said, Lest at any time my adversaries should rejoice over me.” I said this indeed; and yet it was perhaps for my correction that Thou hast caused them to “magnify themselves against me, when my feet slipped;” that is to say, when I stumbled, they were elated, and said many things. For pity, not insult, was due from them to the weak; even as the Apostle speaks: “Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness;” and he combines the reason why: “considering thyself also, lest thou also be tempted.” Not such as these were the persons of whom He speaks: “And when my feet slipped, they rejoiced greatly against me;” but they were such as those of whom He says elsewhere: “They that hate me will rejoice if I fall.”
22. “For I am prepared for the scourges” (ver. 17). Quite a magnificent expression; as if He were saying, “It was even for this that I was born; that I might suffer.” For He was not to be born, but from Adam, to whom the scourge is due. But sinners are in this life sometimes not scourged at all, or are scourged less than their deserts: because the wickedness of their heart is given over as already desperate. Those, however, for whom eternal life is prepared, must needs be scourged in this life: for that sentence is true: “My son, faint not under the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary when thou art rebuked of Him.” “For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” Let not mine enemies therefore insult over me; let “them not magnify themselves;” and if my Father scourgeth me, “I am prepared for the scourge;” because there is an inheritance in store for me. Thou wilt not submit to the scourge: the inheritance is not bestowed upon thee. For “every son” must needs be scourged. So true it is that “every son” is scourged, that He spared not even Him who had no sin. For “I am prepared for the scourges.”
23. “And my sorrow is continually before me.” What “sorrow” is that? Perhaps, a sorrow for my scourge. And, in good truth, my brethren, in good truth, let me say unto you, men do mourn for their scourges, not for the causes on account of which they are scourged. Not such was the person here. Listen, my brethren: If any person suffers any loss, he is more ready to say, “I did not deserve to suffer it,” than to consider why he suffered it, mourning the loss of money, not mourning over that of righteousness. If thou hast sinned, mourn for the loss of thy inward treasure. Thou hast nothing in thy house, but perhaps thou art still more empty in heart; but if thine heart is full of its Good, even thy God, why dost thou not say, “The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away; as it pleased the Lord was it done. Blessed be the Name of the Lord.” Whence then was it that He was grieving? Was it for the “scourging” wherewith He was scourged? God forbid. “And my sorrow” (says He) “is continually before me.” And as if we were to say, “What sorrow? whence comes that sorrow?” he says: “For I declare mine iniquity; and I will have a care for my sin” (ver. 18). See here the reason for the sorrow! It is not a sorrow occasioned by the scourge; not one for the remedy, not for the wound. For the scourge is a remedy against sins. Hear, brethren; We are Christians, and yet if any one’s son dies, he mourns for him but does not mourn for him if he sins. It is then, when he sees him sinning, that he ought to make mourning for him, to lament over him. It is then he should restrain him, and give him a rule to live by; should impose a discipline upon him: or if he has done so, and the other has not taken heed, then was the time when he ought to have been mourned over; then he was more fatally dead whilst living in luxury, than when, by death, he brought his luxury to its close: at that time, when he was doing such things in thine house, he was not only “dead, but he stank also.” These things were worthy to be lamented, the others were such as might well be endured; those, I say, were tolerable, these worthy to be mourned over. They were to be mourned over in the same way that you have heard this person mourn over them: “For I declare mine iniquity. I will have a care for my sin.” Be not free from anxiety when you have confessed your sin, as if always able to confess thy sin, and to commit it again. Do thou “declare thine iniquity in such a manner, as to have a care for thy sin.” What is meant by “having a care of thy sin”? To have a care of thy wound. If you were to say, “I will have a care of my wound,” what would be meant by it, but I will do my endeavour to have it healed. For this is “to have a care for one’s sin,” to be ever struggling, ever endeavouring, ever exerting one’s self, earnestly and zealously, to heal one’s wound. Behold! thou art from day to day mourning over thy sins; but perhaps thy tears indeed flow, but thy hands are unemployed. Do alms, redeem thy sins, let the poor rejoice of thy bounty, that thou also mayest rejoice of the Grace of God. He is in want; so art thou in want also: he is in want at thy hands; so art thou also in want at God’s hand. Dost thou despise one who needs thy aid; and shall God not despise thee when thou needest His? Do thou therefore supply the needs of him who is in want of thine aid; that God may supply thy needs within. This is the meaning of, “I will have a care for my sin.” I will do all that ought to be done, to blot out and to heal my sin. “And I will have a care for my sin.”
24. “But mine enemies live” (ver. 19). They are well off: they rejoice in worldly prosperity, while I am suffering, and “roaring with the groaning of my heart.” In what way do His enemies “live,” in that He hath said of them already, that they have “spoken vanity”? Hear in another Psalm also: “Whose sons are as young plants; firmly rooted.” But above He had said, “Whose mouth speaketh vanity. Their daughters polished after the similitude of a temple: their garners full bursting forth more and more; their cattle fat, their sheep fruitful, multiplying in their streets; no hedge falling into ruin; no cry in their streets.” “Mine enemies” then “live.” This is their life; this life they praise; this they set their hearts upon: this they hold fast to their own ruin. For what follows? They pronounce “the people that is in such a case” blessed. But what sayest thou, who “hast a care for thy sin”? What sayest thou, who “confessest thine iniquity”? He says, “Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord.”
“But mine enemies live, and are strengthened against me, and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied.” What is “hate me wrongfully”? They hate me, who wish their good, whereas were they simply requiting evil for evil, they would not be righteous; were they not to requite with good the good done to them, they would be ungrateful: they, however, who “hate wrongfully,” actually return evil for good. Such were the Jews; Christ came unto them with good things; they requited Him evil for good. Beware, brethren, of this evil; it soon steals upon us. Let no one of you think himself to be far removed from the danger, because we said, “Such were the Jews.” Should a brother, wishing your good, rebuke you, and you hate him, you are like them. And observe, how easily, how soon it is produced; and avoid an evil so great, a sin so easily committed.
25. “They also that render evil for good, were speaking evil of me, because I have pursued the thing that is just” (ver. 20). Therefore was it that I was requited evil for good. What is meant by “pursued after the thing that is just”? Not forsaken it. That you might not always understand persecutio in a bad sense, He means by persecutus pursued after, thoroughly followed. “Because I have followed the thing that is just.” Hear also our Head crying with a lamentable voice in His Passion: “And they cast Me forth, Thy Darling, even as a dead man in abomination.” Was it not enough that He was “dead”? wherefore “in abomination” also? Because He was crucified. For this death of the Cross was a great abomination in their eyes, as they did not perceive that it was spoken in prophecy, “Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.” For He did not Himself bring death; but He found it here, propagated from the curse of the first man; and this same death of ours, which had originated in sin, He had taken upon Himself, and hung on the Tree. Lest therefore some persons should think (as some of the Heretics think), that our Lord Jesus Christ had only a false body of flesh; and that the death by which He made satisfaction on the Cross was not a real death, the Prophet notices this, and says, “Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree.” He shows then that the Son of God died a true death, the death which was due to mortal flesh: lest if He were not “accursed,” you should think that He had not truly died. But since that death was not an illusion, but had descended from that original stock, which had been derived from the curse, when He said, “Ye shall surely die:” and since a true death assuredly extended even to Him, that a true life might extend itself to us, the curse of death also did extend to Him, that the blessing of life might extend even unto us. “And they cast Me forth, Thy Darling, even as a dead man in abomination.”
26. “Forsake me not, O Lord; O my God, depart not from me” (ver. 21). Let us speak in Him, let us speak through Him (for He Himself intercedeth for us), and let us say, “Forsake me not, O Lord my God.” And yet He had said, “My God! My God! why hast Thou forsaken Me?” and He now says, “O My God, depart not from Me.” If He does not forsake the body, did He forsake the Head? Whose words then are these but the First Man’s? To show then that He carried about Him a true body of flesh derived from him, He says, “My God, My God why hast Thou forsaken Me?” God had not forsaken Him. If He does not forsake Thee, who believest in Him, could the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, One God, forsake Christ? But He had transferred to Himself the person of the First Man. We know by the words of an Apostle, that “our old man is crucified with Him.” We should not, however, be divested of our old nature, had He not been crucified “in weakness.” For it was to this end that He came that we may be renewed in Him, because it is by aspiration after Him, and by following the example of His suffering, that we are renewed. Therefore that was the cry of infirmity; that cry, I mean, in which it was said, “Why hast Thou forsaken Me?” Thence was it said in that passage above, “the words of mine offences.” As if He were saying, These words are transferred to My Person from that of the sinner.
