Psalm XLV · Part 3 of 3
26. …“The rich among the people shall entreat Thy face.” Both they who shall entreat that face, and He whose face they will entreat, are all collectively but one Bride, but one Queen, mother and children belonging all together unto Christ, belonging unto their Head.…
27. “All the glory of her, the King’s daughter, is from within” (ver. 13). Not only is her robe, outwardly, “of gold, and of divers colours;” but He who loved her beauty, knew her to be also beautiful within. What are those inward charms? Those of conscience. It is there Christ sees; it is there Christ loves her: it is there He addresses her, there punishes, there crowns. Let then thine alms be done in secret; for “all the glory of her, the King’s daughter, is from within.” “With fringes of gold, clothed with divers colours” (ver. 14). Her beauty is from within; yet in the “fringes of gold” is the diversity of languages: the beauty of doctrine. What do these avail, if them be not that beauty “from within”? “The virgins shall be brought unto the King after her.” It has been fulfilled indeed. The Church has believed; the Church has been formed throughout all nations. And to what a degree do virgins now seek to find favour in the eyes of that King! Whence are they moved to do so? Even because the Church preceded them. “The virgins shall be brought unto the King after her. Her near kinswomen shall be brought unto Thee.” For they that are brought unto Him are not strangers, but her “near kinswomen,” that belong to her. And because he had said, “unto the King,” he says, turning the discourse to Him, “her near kinswomen shall be brought unto Thee.”
28. “With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought and shall be led into the Temple of the King” (ver. 15). The “Temple of the King” is the Church itself: it is the Church itself that enters into “the Temple of the King.” Whereof is that Temple constructed? Of the men who enter the Temple? Who but God’s “faithful” ones are its “living stones”? “They shall be led into the Temple of the King.” For there are virgins without the Temple of the King, the nuns among the heretics: they are virgins, it is true; but what will that profit them, unless they be led into the “Temple of the King”? The “Temple of the King” is in unity: the “Temple of the King” is not ruinous, is not rent asunder, is not divided. The cement of those living stones is “charity.”
29. “Instead of thy fathers, children are born to thee” (ver. 16). Nothing can be more manifest. Now consider the “Temple of the King” itself, for it is on its behalf he speaks, on account of the unity of the body that is spread throughout all the world: for those very persons who have chosen to be virgins, cannot find favour with the King unless they be led into the Temple of the King. “Instead of thy fathers, are thy children born to thee.” It was the Apostles begat thee: they were “sent:” they were the preachers: they are “the fathers.” But was it possible for them to be with us in the body for ever? Although one of them said, “I desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better: to abide in the flesh is necessary for your sakes.” It is true he said this, but how long was it possible for him to remain here? Could it be till this present time, could it be to all futurity? Is the Church then left desolate by their departure? God forbid. “Instead of thy fathers, children have been born to thee.” What is that? The Apostles were sent to thee as “fathers,” instead of the Apostles sons have been born to thee: there have been appointed Bishops. For in the present day, whence do the Bishops, throughout all the world, derive their origin? The Church itself calls them fathers; the Church itself brought them forth, and placed them on the thrones of “the fathers.” Think not thyself abandoned then, because thou seest not Peter, nor seest Paul: seest not those through whom thou wert born. Out of thine own offspring has a body of “fathers” been raised up to thee. “Instead of thy fathers, have children been born to thee.” Observe how widely diffused is the “Temple of the King,” that “the virgins that are not led to the Temple of the King,” may know that they have nothing to do with that marriage. “Thou shalt make them princes over all the earth.” This is the Universal Church: her children have been made “princes over all the earth:” her children have been appointed instead of the “fathers.” Let those who are cut off own the truth of this, let them come to the One Body: let them be led into the Temple of the King. God hath established His Temple everywhere: hath laid everywhere “the foundations of the Prophets and Apostles.” The Church has brought “forth sons;” has made them “instead of her fathers” to be “princes over all the earth.”
30. “They shall be mindful of thy name in every generation and generation; therefore shall the peoples confess unto Thee” (ver. 17). What does it profit then to “confess” indeed and yet to confess out of “the Temple”? What does it profit to pray, and yet not to pray on the Mount? “I cried,” says he, “unto the Lord with my voice: and He heard me out of His holy hill.” Out of what “hill”? Out of that of which it is said, “A city set upon a hill cannot be hid.” Of what “hill”? Out of that hill which Daniel saw “grow out of a small stone, and break all the kingdoms of the earth; and cover all the face of the earth.” There let him pray, who hopes to receive: there let him ask, who would have his prayer heard: there let him confess, who wishes to be pardoned. “Therefore shall the peoples confess unto thee for ever, world without end.” For in that eternal life it is true indeed there will no longer be the mourning over sins: but yet in the praises of God by that everlasting City which is above, there will not be wanting a perpetual confession of the greatness of that happiness. For to that City itself, to which another Psalm sings, “Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God,” to her who is the very Bride of Christ, the very Queen, a “King’s daughter, and a King’s consort;”…the peoples shall for this very cause confess even to herself; the hearts of all, now enlightened by perfect charity, being laid bare, and made manifest, that she may know the whole of herself most completely, who here is, in many parts of her, unknown to herself.…
