Psalm LXVIII · Part 1 of 4
Psalm LXVIII.
1. Of this Psalm, the title seemeth not to need operose discussion: for simple and easy it appeareth. For thus it standeth: “For the end, for David himself a Psalm of a Song.” But in many Psalms already we have reminded you what is “at the end: for the end of the Law is Christ for righteousness to every man believing:” He is the end which maketh perfect, not that which consumeth or destroyeth. Nevertheless, if any one endeavoureth to inquire, what meaneth, “a Psalm of a Song:” why not either “Psalm” or “Song,” but both; or what is the difference between Psalm of Song, and Song of Psalm, because even thus of some Psalms the titles are inscribed: he will find perchance something which we leave for men more acute and more at leisure than ourselves.…
2. “Let God rise up, and let His enemies be scattered” (ver. 1). Already this hath come to pass, Christ hath risen up, “who is over all things, God blessed for ever,” and His enemies have been dispersed through all nations, to wit, the Jews; in that very place, where they practised their enmities, being overthrown in war, and thence through all places dispersed: and now they hate, but fear, and in that very fear they do that which followeth, “And let them that hate Him flee from His face.” The flight indeed of the mind is fear. For in carnal flight, whither flee they from the face of Him who everywhere showeth the efficacy of His presence? “Whither shall I depart,” saith he, “from Thy Spirit, and from Thy face whither shall I flee?” With mind, therefore, not with body, they flee; to wit, by being afraid, not by being hidden; and not from that face which they see not, but from that which they are compelled to see. For the face of Him hath His presence in His Church been called.…
3. “As smoke faileth, let them fail” (ver. 2). For they lifted up themselves from the fires of their hatred unto the vapouring of pride, and against Heaven setting their mouth, and shouting, “Crucify, Crucify,” Him taken captive they derided, Him hanging they mocked: and being soon conquered by that very Person against whom they swelled victorious, they vanished away. “As wax melteth from the face of fire, so let sinners perish from the face of God.” Though perchance in this passage he hath referred to those men, whose hard-heartedness in tears of penitence is dissolved: yet this also may be understood, that he threateneth future judgment; because though in this world like smoke, in lifting up themselves, that is, in priding themselves, they have melted away, there will come to them at the last final damnation, so that from His face they will perish for everlasting, when in His own glory He shall have appeared, like fire, for the punishment of the ungodly, and the light of the righteous.
4. Lastly, there followeth, “And let just men be joyous, and exult in the sight of God, let them delight in gladness” (ver. 3). For then shall they hear, “Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive ye the kingdom.” “Let them be joyous,” therefore, that have toiled, “and exult in the sight of God.” For there will not be in this exultation, as though it were before men, any empty boasting; but (it will be) in the sight of Him who unerringly looketh into that which He hath granted. “Let them delight in gladness:” no longer exulting with trembling, as in this world, so long as “human life is a trial upon earth.” Secondly, he turneth himself to those very persons to whom he hath given so great hope, and to them while here living he speaketh and exhorteth: “Sing ye to God, psalm ye to His name” (ver. 4). Already on this subject in the exposition of the Title we have before spoken that which seemed meet. He singeth to God, that liveth to God: He psalmeth to His name, that worketh unto His Glory. In singing thus, in psalming thus, that is, by so living, by so working, “a way make ye to Him,” he saith, “that hath ascended above the setting.” A way make ye to Christ: so that through the beautiful feet of men telling good tidings, the hearts of men believing many have a way opened to Him. For the Same is He that hath ascended above the “setting:” either because the new life of one turned to Him receiveth Him not, except the old life shall have set by his renouncing this world, or because He ascended above the setting, when by rising again He conquered the downfall of the body. “For The Lord is His name.” Which if they had known, the Lord of glory they never would have crucified.
5. “Exult ye in the sight of Him,” O ye to whom hath been said, “Sing ye to God, psalm ye to the name of Him, a way make ye to Him that hath ascended above the setting,” also “exult in the sight of Him:” as if “sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing.” For while ye make a way to Him, while ye prepare a way whereby He may come and possess the nations, ye are to suffer in the sight of men many sorrowful things. But not only faint not, but even exult, not in the sight of men, but in the sight of God. “In hope rejoicing, in tribulation enduring:” “exult ye in the sight of Him.” For they that in the sight of men trouble you, “shall be troubled by the face of Him, the Father of orphans and Judge of widows” (ver. 5). For desolate they suppose them to be, from whom ofttimes by the sword of the Word of God both parents from sons, and husbands from wives, are severed: but persons destitute and widowed have the consolation “of the Father of orphans and Judge of widows:” they have the consolation of Him that say to Him, “For my father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord hath taken up me:” and they that have hoped in the Lord, continuing in prayers by night and by day: by whose face those men shall be troubled when they shall have seen themselves prevail nothing, for that the whole world hath gone away after Him. For out of those orphans and widows, that is, persons destitute of partnership in this world’s hope, the Lord for Himself doth build a Temple: whereof in continuation he saith, “The Lord is in His holy place.”
6. For what is His place he hath disclosed, when he saith, “God that maketh to dwell men of one mood in a house” (ver. 6): men of one mind, of one sentiment: this is the holy place of the Lord. For when he had said, “The Lord is in His holy place:” as though we were inquiring in what place, since He is everywhere wholly, and no place of corporal space containeth Him; forthwith he hath subjoined somewhat, that we should not seek Him apart from ourselves, but rather being of one mood dwelling in a house, we should deserve that He also Himself deign to dwell among us. This is the holy place of the Lord, the thing that most men seek to have, a place where in prayer they may be hearkened unto.…For as in a great house of a man, the Lord thereof doth not abide in every place whatsoever, but in some place doubtless more private and honourable: so God dwelleth not in all men that are in His house (for He dwelleth not in the vessels of dishonour), but His holy place are they whom “He maketh to dwell of one mood,” or “of one manner, in a house.” For what are called τρόποι in Greek, by both modi and mores (moods and manners), in Latin may be interpreted. Nor hath the Greek writer, “Who maketh to dwell,” but only “maketh to dwell.” “The Lord,” then, “is in His holy place.”…
7. But to prove that by His Grace He buildeth to Himself this place, not for the sake of the merits preceding of those persons out of whom He buildeth it, see what followeth: “Who leadeth forth men fettered, in strength.” For He looseth the heavy bonds of sins, wherewith they were fettered so that they could not walk in the way of the commandments: but He leadeth them forth “in strength,” which before His Grace they had not. “Likewise men provoking that dwell in the tombs:” that is, every way dead, taken up with dead works. For these men provoke Him to anger by withstanding justice: for those fettered men perchance would walk, and are not able, and are praying of God that they may be able, and are saying to Him, “From my necessities lead me forth.” By whom being heard, they give thanks, saying, “Thou hast broken asunder my bonds.” But these provoking men that dwell in the tombs, are of that kind, which in another passage the Scripture pointeth out, saying, “From a dead man, as from one that is not, confession perisheth.” Whence there is this saying, “When a sinner shall have come into the depth of evil things, he despiseth.” For it is one thing to long for, another thing to fight against righteousness: one thing from evil to desire to be delivered, another thing one’s evil doings to defend rather than to confess: both kinds nevertheless the Grace of Christ leadeth forth in strength. With what strength, but that wherewith against sin even unto blood they are to strive? For out of each kind are made meet persons, whereof to construct His holy place; those being loosened, these being raised to life. For even of the woman, whom Satan had bound for eighteen years, by His command He loosed the bonds; and Lazarus’ death by His voice He overcame. He that hath done these things in bodies, is able to do more marvellous things in characters, and to make men of one mood to dwell in a house: “leading forth men fettered in strength, likewise men provoking that dwell in the tombs.”
8. “O God, when Thou wentest forth before Thy people” (ver. 7). His going forth is perceived, when He appeareth in His works. But He appeareth not to all men, but to them that know how to spy out His works. For I do not now speak of those works which are conspicuous to all men, Heaven and earth and sea and all things that in them are; but the works whereby He leadeth forth men fettered in strength, likewise men provoking that dwell in the tombs, and maketh them of one manner to dwell in a house. Thus He goeth forth before His people, that is, before those that do perceive this His Grace. Lastly, there followeth, “When Thou wentest by in the desert, the earth was moved” (ver. 8). A desert were the nations, which knew not God: a desert they were, where by God Himself no law had been given, where no Prophet had dwelled, and foretold the Lord to come. “When,” then, “Thou wentest by in the desert,” when Thou wast preached in the nations; “the earth was moved,” to the faith earthly men were stirred up. But whence was it moved? “For the heavens dropped from the face of God.” Perchance here some one calleth to mind that time, when in the desert God was going over before His people, before the sons of Israel, by day in the pillar of cloud, by night in the brightness of fire; and determineth that thus it is that “the heavens dropped from the face of God,” for manna He rained upon His people: that the same thing also is that which followeth, “Mount Sina from the face of the God of Israel,” “with voluntary rain severing God to Thine inheritance” (ver. 9), namely, the God that on Mount Sina spake to Moses, when He gave the Law, so that the manna is the voluntary rain, which God severed for His inheritance, that is, for His people; because them alone He so fed, not the other nations also: so that what next he saith, “and it was weakened,” is understood of the inheritance being itself weakened; for they murmuring, fastidiously loathed the manna, longing for victuals of flesh, and those things on which they had been accustomed to live in Egypt.… Lastly, all those men in the desert were stricken down, nor were any of them except two found worthy to go into the land of promise. Although even if in the sons of them that inheritance be said to have been perfected, we ought more readily to hold to a spiritual sense. For all those things in a figure did happen to them; until the day should break, and the shadows should be removed.
9. May then the Lord open to us that knock; and may the secret things of His mysteries, as far as Himself vouchsafeth, be disclosed. For in order that the earth might be moved to the Truth when into the desert of the Gentiles the Gospel was passing, “the Heavens dropped from the face of God.” These are the Heavens, whereof in another Psalm is sung, “The Heavens are telling forth the glory of God.”… So here also, “the Heavens dropped;” but “from the face of God.” For even these very persons have been “saved through faith, and this not of themselves, but God’s gift it is, not of works, lest perchance any man should be lifted up. For of Himself we are the workmanship,” “that maketh men of one mood to dwell in a house.”
10. But what is that which followeth, “Mount Sina from the face of the God of Israel”? Must there be understood “dropped;” so that what he hath called by the name of Heavens, the same he hath willed to be understood under the name of Mount Sina also; just as we said that those are called mountains, which were called Heavens? Nor in this sense ought it to move us that He saith “mountain,” not mountains, while in that place they were called “Heavens,” not Heaven: for in another Psalm also after it had been said, “The Heavens are telling forth the glory of God:” after the manner of Scripture repeating the same sense in different words, subsequently there is said, “And the firmament telleth the works of His hands.” First he said “Heavens,” not “Heaven:” and yet afterwards not “firmaments,” but “firmament.” For God called the firmament Heaven, as in Genesis hath been written. Thus then Heavens and Heaven, mountains and mountain, are not a different thing, but the very same thing: just as Churches many, and the One Church, are not a different thing, but the very same thing. Why then “Mount Sina, which gendereth unto bondage”? as saith the Apostle. Is perchance the Law itself to be understood in Mount Sina, as that which “the Heavens dropped from the face of God,” in order that the earth might be moved? And is this the very moving of the earth, when men are troubled, because the Law they cannot fulfil? But if so it is, this is the voluntary rain, whereof in confirmation he saith, “Voluntary rain God severing to Thine inheritance:” because “He hath not done so to any nation, and His judgment He hath not manifested to them.” God therefore set apart this voluntary rain to His inheritance because He gave the Law. And “there was made weak,” either the Law, or the inheritance. The Law may be understood to have been made weak, because it was not fulfilled; not that of itself it is weak, but because it maketh men weak, by threatening punishment, and not aiding through grace. For also the very word the Apostle hath used, where he saith, “For that which was impossible of the Law, wherein it was made weak through the flesh:” willing to intimate that through the Spirit it is fulfilled: nevertheless, itself he hath said is made weak, because by weak men it cannot be fulfilled. But the inheritance, that is, the people, without any doubt is understood to have been made weak by the giving to them of the Law. For “the Law came in, that transgression might abound.” But that which followeth, “But Thou hast made it perfect,” to the Law is thus referred, forasmuch as it is made perfect, that is, is fulfilled after that which the Lord saith in the Gospel, “I have not come to annul the Law, but to fulfil.”… There is in these words yet another sense: which seemeth to me more to approve itself. For much more in accordance with the context, grace itself is understood to be the voluntary rain, because with no preceding merits of works it is given gratis. “For if grace, no longer of works: otherwise grace no longer is grace.”…“But to humble men He giveth grace.” And it was made weak, but Thou hast made it perfect:” because “virtue in weakness is perfected.” Some copies indeed, both Latin and Greek, have not “Mount Sina;” but, “from the face of the God of Sina, from the face of the God of Israel.” That is, “The Heavens dropped from the face of God:” and, as if enquiry were made of what God, “from the face of the God,” he saith, “of Sina, from the face of the God of Israel,” that is, from the face of the God that gave the Law to the people of Israel. Why then “the Heavens dropped from the face of God,” from the face of this God, but because thus was fulfilled that which had been foretold, “Blessing He shall give that hath given the Law”? The Law whereby to terrify a man that relieth on human powers; blessing, whereby He delivereth a man that hopeth in God. Thou then, O God, hast made perfect Thine inheritance; because it is made weak in itself, in order that it may be made perfect by Thee.
11. “Thine animals shall dwell therein” (ver. 10). “Thine,” not their own; to Thee subject, not for themselves free; for Thee needy, not for themselves sufficient. Lastly, he continueth, “Thou hast prepared in Thine own sweetness for the needy, O God.” “In Thine own sweetness,” not in his meetness. For the needy he is, for he hath been made weak, in order that he may be made perfect: he hath acknowledged himself indigent, that he may be replenished. This is that sweetness, whereof in another place is said, “The Lord shall give sweetness, and our land shall give her fruit:” in order that a good work may be done not for fear, but for love; not for dread of punishment, but for love of righteousness. For this is true and sound freedom. But the Lord hath prepared this for one wanting, not for one abounding, whose reproach is that poverty: of which sort in another place is said, “Reproach to these men that abound, and contempt to proud men.” For those he hath called proud, whom he hath called them that abound.
12. “The Lord shall give the Word” (ver. 11): to wit, food for His animals which shall dwell therein. But what shall these animals work to whom He shall give the word? What but that which followeth? “To them preaching the Gospel in much virtue.” With what virtue, but with that strength wherein He leadeth forth men fettered? Perchance also here he speaketh of that virtue, wherewith in preaching the Gospel they wrought wondrous signs. Who then “shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel with much virtue”? “The King,” he saith, “of the virtues of the Beloved” (ver. 12). The Father therefore is King of the virtues of the Son. For the Beloved, when there is not specified any person that is beloved, by a substitution of name, of the Only Son is understood. Is not the Son Himself King of His virtues, to wit of the virtues serving Himself? Because with much virtue the King of Virtues shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel, of Whom it hath been said, “The Lord of Virtues, He is the King of Glory?” But his not having said King of Virtues, but “King of the Virtues of the beloved,” is a most usual expression in the Scriptures, if any one observe: which thing chiefly appeareth in those cases where even the person’s own name is already expressed, so that it cannot at all be doubted that it is the same person of whom something is said. Of which sort also is that which in the Pentateuch in many passages is found: “And Moses did it, as the Lord commanded Moses.” He said not that which is usual in our expressions, And Moses did, as the Lord commanded him; but, “Moses did as the Lord commanded Moses,” as if one person were the Moses whom He commanded, and another person the Moses who did, whereas it is the very same. In the New Testament such expressions are most difficult to find.…“The King,” therefore, “of the virtues of the Beloved,” thus may be understood, as if it were to be said, the King of His virtues, because both King of Virtues is Christ, and the Beloved is the very same Christ. However, this sense hath not so great urgency, as that no other can be accepted: because the Father also may be understood as King of the virtues of His Beloved Son, to whom the Beloved Himself saith, “All Mine are Thine, and Thine Mine.” But if perchance it is asked, whether God the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ can be called King also, I know not whether any one would dare to withhold this name from Him in the passage where the Apostle saith, “But to the King of ages, immortal, invisible, the only God.” Because even if this be said of the Trinity itself, therein is also God the Father. But if we do not carnally understand, “O God, Thy Judgment to the King give Thou, and Thy justice to the Son of the King:” I know not whether anything else hath been said than, “to Thy Son.” King therefore is the Father also. Whence that verse of this Psalm, “King of the virtues of the Beloved;” in either way may be understood. When therefore he had said, “The Lord shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel with much virtue:” because virtue itself by Him is ruled, and serveth Him by whom it is given; the Lord Himself, he saith, who shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel with much virtue, is the King of the virtues of the Beloved.
13. In the next place there followeth, “Of the Beloved, and of the beauty of the House to divide the spoils.” The repetition belongeth to eulogy.… But whether it be repeated, or whether it be received as spoken once, the word which hath been set down, namely, “Beloved,” I suppose that thus must be understood that which followeth, “and of the beauty of a house to divide the spoils;” as if there were said, “Chosen even to divide the spoils of the beauty of a house,” that is, Chosen even for dividing the spoils. For beautiful Christ hath made His House, that is, the Church, by dividing to Her spoils: in the same manner as the Body is beautiful in the distribution of the members. “Spoils” moreover those are called that are stripped off from conquered foes. What this is the Gospel adviseth us in the passage where we read, “No one goeth into the house of a strong man to spoil his vessels, unless first he shall have bound the strong man.” Christ therefore hath bound the devil with spiritual bonds, by overcoming death, and by ascending from Hell above the Heavens: He hath bound him by the Sacrament of His Incarnation, because though finding nothing in Him deserving of death, yet he was permitted to kill: and from him so bound He took away his vessels as though they were spoils. For he was working in the sons of disobedience, of whose unbelief he made use to work his own will. These vessels the Lord cleansing by the remission of sins, sanctifying these spoils wrested from the foe laid prostrate and bound, these He hath divided to the beauty of His House; making some apostles, some prophets, some pastors and doctors, for the work of the ministry, for the building up of the Body of Christ. For as the body is one, and hath many members, and though all the members of the body are many, the body is one: so also is Christ. “Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Powers? Have all the gifts of healings? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?” “But all these things worketh one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one his own gifts, as He willeth.” And such is the beauty of the house, whereto the spoils are divided, that a lover thereof with this fairness being enkindled, crieth out, “O Lord, I have loved the grace of Thy House.”
