Psalm LXVIII · Part 2 of 4
14. Now in that which followeth, he turneth himself to address the members themselves, whereof the beauty of the House is composed, saying, “If ye sleep in the midst of the lots, wings of a dove silvered, and between the shoulders thereof in the freshness of gold” (ver. 13). First, we must here examine the order of the words, in what manner the sentence is ended; which certainly awaiteth, when there is said, “If ye sleep:” secondly, in that which he saith, namely, “wings of dove silvered,” whether in the singular number it must be understood as being, “of this wing” thereof, or in the plural as, “these wings.” But the singular number the Greek excludeth, where always in the plural we read it written. But still it is uncertain whether it be these wings; or whether, “O ye wings,” so as that he may seem to speak to the wings themselves. Whether therefore by the words which have preceded, that sentence be ended, so that the order is, “The Lord shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel with much virtue, if ye sleep in the midst of the lots, O ye wings of a dove silvered:” or by these which follow, so that the order is, “If ye sleep in the midst of the lots, the wings of a dove silvered with snow shall be whitened in Selmon:” that is, the wings themselves shall be whitened, if ye sleep in the midst “of the lots:” so that he may be understood to say this to them that are divided to the beauty of the House, as it were spoils; that is, if ye sleep in the “midst of the lots,” O ye that are divided to the beauty of the House, “through the manifestation of the Spirit unto profit,” so that “to one indeed is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge,” etc., if then ye sleep in the midst of the lots, then the wings of a dove silvered with snow shall be whitened in Selmon. It may also be thus: “If ye being the wings of a dove silvered, sleep in the midst of the lots, with snow they shall be whitened in Selmon,” so as that those men be understood who through grace receive remission of sins. Whence also of the Church Herself, is said in the Song of Songs, “Who is She that goeth up whitened?” For this promise of God is held out through the Prophet, saying, “If your sins shall have been like scarlet, like snow I will whiten them.” It may also thus be understood, so that in that which hath been said, “wings of a dove silvered,” there be understood, ye shall be, so that this is the sense, O ye that like as it were spoils to the beauty of the house are divided, if ye sleep in the “midst of the lots,” wings of a dove silvered ye shall be: that is, into higher places ye shall be lifted up, adhering however to the bond of the Church. For I think no other dove silvered can be better perceived here, than that whereof hath been said, “One is My dove.” But silvered She is because with divine sayings she hath been instructed: for the sayings of the Lord in another place are called “silver with fire refined, purged sevenfold.” Some great good thing therefore it is, to sleep in the midst of the lots, which some would have to be the Two Testaments, so that to “sleep in the midst of the lots” is to rest on the authority of those Testaments, that is, to acquiesce in the testimony of either Testament: so that whenever anything out of them is produced and proved, all strife is ended in peaceful acquiescence.…
15. “Between the shoulders,” however. This is indeed a part of the body, it is a part about the region of the heart, at the hinder parts however, that is, at the back: which part of that dove silvered he saith is “in the greenness of gold,” that is, in the vigour of wisdom, which vigour I think cannot be better understood than by love. But why on the back, and not on the breast? Although I wonder in what sense this word is put in another Psalm, where there is said, “Between His shoulders He shall overshadow thee, and under His wings thou shalt hope:” forasmuch as under wings there cannot be overshadowed anything but what shall be under the breast. And in Latin, indeed, “between the shoulders,” perchance in some degree of both parts may be understood, both before and behind, that we may take shoulders to be the parts which have the head betwixt them; and in Hebrew perchance the word is ambiguous, which may in this manner also be understood: but the word that is in the Greek, μετ€φρενα, signifieth not anything but at the back, which is “between the shoulders.” Is there for this reason there the greenness of gold, that is, wisdom and love, because in that place there are in a manner the roots of the wings? or because in that place is carried that light burden? For what are even the wings themselves, but the two commandments of love, whereon hangeth the whole Law and the Prophets? what is that same light burden, but that same love which in these two commandments is fulfilled? For whatever thing is difficult in a commandment, is a light thing to a lover. Nor on any other account is rightly understood the saying, “My burden is light,” but because He giveth the Holy Spirit, whereby love is shed abroad in our hearts, in order that in love we may do freely that which he that doeth in fear doeth slavishly; nor is he a lover of what is right, when he would prefer, if so be it were possible, that what is right should not be commanded.
16. It may also be required, when it hath not been said, if ye sleep in the lots, but “in the midst of the lots;” what this is, “in the midst of the lots.” Which expression indeed, if more exactly it were translated from the Greek, would signify, “in the midst between the lots,” which is in no one of the interpreters I have read: therefore I suppose, that what hath been said signifieth much the same, to wit the expression, “in the midst of the lots.” Hence therefore what seemeth to me I will explain. Ofttimes this word is wont to be used for uniting and pacifying one thing and another, that they may not mutually disagree: as when God is establishing His covenant between Himself and His people, this word the Scripture useth; for instead of that expression which is in Latin between Me and you, the Greek hath, in the midst of Me and you. So also of the sign of Circumcision, when God speaketh to Abraham, He saith, “There shall be a testament between Me and thee and all thy seed:” which the Greek hath, in the midst of Me and thee, and the midst of thy seed. Also when He was speaking to Noe of the bow in the clouds to establish a sign, this word very often He repeateth: and that which the Latin copies have, between Me and you, or between Me and every living soul, and whatever suchlike expressions there are used, is found in the Greek to be, in the middle of Me and you, which is ‡νὰ μ™σον. David also and Jonathan establish a sign between them, that they may not disagree with a difference of thought: and that which in Latin is expressed, between both, in the middle of both, the Greek hath expressed in the same word, which is ‡νὰ μ™σον. But it was best that in this passage of the Psalms our translators said not, “among the lots,” which expression is more suited to the Latin idiom; but, “in the midst of the lots,” as though “in the midst between the lots,” which rather is the reading in the Greek, and which is wont to be said in the case of those things which ought to have a mutual consent.…But why in the “lots” the Testaments should be perceived, though this word is Greek, and the Testament is not so named, the reason is, because through a testament is given inheritance, which in Greek is called κληρονομία, and an heir κληρονόμος Now κλῆρος in Greek is the term for lot, and lots according to the promise of God are called those parts of the inheritance which were distributed to the people. Whence the tribe of Levi was commanded not to have lot among their brethren, because they were sustained by tithes from them. For, I think, they that have been ordained in the grades of the Ecclesiastical Ministry have been called both Clergy and Clerks, because Matthias by lot was chosen, who we read was the first that was ordained by the Apostles. Henceforth, because of inheritance which is given by testament, as though by that which is made that which maketh, by the name of “lots” the Testaments themselves are signified.
17. Nevertheless, to me here another sense also occurreth, if I mistake not, to be preferred; understanding by cleri the inheritances themselves: so that, whereas the inheritance of the Old Testament, although in a shadow significant of the future, is earthly felicity; but the inheritance of the New Testament is everlasting immortality; to “sleep in the midst of the lots” is not too earnestly now to seek the former, and still patiently to look for the latter.…And because so well they have slept, on them, as it were on wings now flieth, and with praises is exalted, the Church: to wit, the Dove silvered, in order that by this fame of theirs, posterity having been invited to imitate them, while in like manner the rest also sleep, there may be added wings whereby even unto the end of the world sublimely she may be preached.
18. “While He that is above the heavens distinguisheth kings over Her, with snow they shall be made white in Selmon” (ver. 14). While He “above the heavens,” He that ascended over all heavens that He might fulfil all things, “while He distinguisheth kings over Her,” that is, over that same “Dove silvered.” For the Apostle continueth and saith, and “He hath Himself given some for Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.” For what other reason is there to distinguish kings over Her, save for the work of the Ministry, for the edification of the Body of Christ: when she is indeed Herself the Body of Christ? But they are called kings from ruling: and what more than the lusts of the flesh, that sin may not reign in their mortal body to obey the desires thereof, that they yield not their members instruments of iniquity unto sin, but yield themselves to God, as though from the dead living, and their members instruments of righteousness to God? For thus shall the kings be distinguished from foreigners, because they draw not the yoke with unbelievers: secondly, in a peaceful manner being distinguished from one another by their proper gifts. For not all are Apostles, or all Prophets, or all Teachers, or all have gifts of healings, or all with tongues do speak, or all interpret. “But all these things worketh one and the same Spirit, dividing proper gifts to each one as He willeth.” In giving which Spirit He that is above the Heavens distinguisheth kings over the Dove silvered. Of which Holy Spirit, when, sent to His Mother full of grace, the Angel was speaking, to her enquiring in what manner it could come to pass that she was announced as going to bear, seeing she knew not a man:…he saith, “The Holy Spirit shall come over upon thee, and the virtue of the Most Highest shall overshadow thee,” that is, shall make a shadow for thee, “wherefore that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.” That “shadow” again is understood of a defence against the heat of carnal lusts: whence not in carnal concupiscence, but in spiritual belief, the Virgin conceived Christ. But the shadow consisteth of light and body: and further, The “Word” that “was in the beginning,” that true Light, in order that a noonday shadow might be made for us; “the Word,” I say, “was made Flesh, and dwelled in us.”…
19. But this mountain he calleth the “mountain of God, a mountain fruitful, a mountain full of curds” (ver. 15), or “a mountain fat.” But here what else would he call fat but fruitful? For there is also a mountain called by that name, that is to say, Selmon. But what mountain ought we to understand by “the mountain of God, a mountain fruitful, a mountain full of curds,” but the same Lord Christ? Of whom also another Prophet saith, “There shall be manifest in the last times the mountain of the Lord prepared on the top of the mountains”? He is Himself the “Mountain full of curds,” because of the babes to be fed with grace as though it were with milk; a mountain rich to strengthen and enrich them by the excellence of the gifts; for even the milk itself whence curd is made, in a wonderful manner signifieth grace; for it floweth out of the overflowing of the mother’s bowels, and of a sweet compassion unto babes freely it is poured forth. But in the Greek the case is doubtful, whether it be the nominative or the accusative: for in that language mountain is of the neuter gender, not of the masculine: therefore some Latin translators have not translated it, “unto the Mountain of God,” but, “the Mountain of God.” But I think, “unto Selmon the Mountain of God,” is better, that is, “unto” the Mountain of God which is called Selmon: according to the interpretation which, as we best could, we have explained above.
20. Secondly, in the expression, “Mountain of God, Mountain full of curds,” Mountain “fruitful,” let no one dare from this to compare the Lord Jesus Christ with the rest of the Saints, who are themselves also called mountains of God.…For there were not wanting men to call Him, some John Baptist, some Elias, some Jeremias, or one of the Prophets; He turneth to them and saith, “Why do ye imagine mountains full of curds, a mountain,” he saith, “wherein it hath pleased God to dwell therein”? (ver. 16). “Why do ye imagine?” For as they are a light, because to themselves also hath been said, “Ye are the Light of the world,” but something different hath been called “the true Light which enlighteneth every man,” so they are mountains; but far different is the Mountain “prepared on the top of the mountains.” These mountains therefore in bearing that Mountain are glorious: one of which mountains saith, “but from me far be it to glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom to me the world hath been crucified, and I to the world:” so that “he hath glorieth, not in himself, but in the Lord may glory.” “Why” then “do ye imagine mountains full of curds,” that “Mountain wherein it hath pleased God to dwell therein”? Not because in other men He dwelleth not, but because in them through Him. “For in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead,” not in a shadow, as in the temple made by king Solomon, but “bodily,” that is, solidly and truly.…“For there is One God, and One Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ Jesus,” Mountain of mountains, as Saint of saints. Whence He saith, “I in them and Thou in Me.” “Why then do ye imagine mountains full of curds, the mountain wherein it hath pleased God to dwell in Him?” For those mountains full of curds that Mountain the Lord shall inhabit even unto the end, that something they may be to whom He saith, “for without Me nothing ye are able to do.”
21. Thus cometh to pass that also which followeth: “The Chariot of God is of ten thousands manifold:” or “of tens of thousands manifold:” or, “ten times thousand times manifold” (ver. 17). For one Greek word, which hath there been used, μυριοπλ€σιον, each Latin interpreter hath rendered as best he could, but in Latin it could not be adequately expressed: for a thousand with the Greeks is called χίλια, but μυρι€δες are a number of tens of thousands: for one μυριὰς are ten thousands. Thus a vast number of saints and believers, who by bearing God become in a manner the chariot of God, he hath signified under this name. By abiding in and guiding this, He conducteth it, as though it were His Chariot, unto the end, as if unto some appointed place. For, “the beginning is Christ; secondly, that are of Christ, at the appearing of Him; then the end.” This is Holy Church: which is that which followeth, “thousands of men rejoicing.” For in hope they are joyful, until they be conducted unto the end, which now they look for through patience. For admirably, when he had said, “Thousands of men rejoicing:” immediately he added, “The Lord is in them.” That we may not wonder why they rejoice, “The Lord is in them.” For through many tribulations we must needs enter into the kingdom of God, but, “The Lord is in them.” Therefore even if they are as it were sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing, though not now in that same end, to which they have not yet come, yet in hope they are rejoicing, and in tribulation patient: for, “The Lord is in them, in Sina in the holy place.” In the interpretations of Hebrew names, we find Sina interpreted commandment: and some other interpretations it has, but I think this to be more agreeable to the present passage. For giving a reason why those thousands rejoice, whereof the Chariot of God doth consist, “The Lord,” he saith, “is in them, in Sins in the holy place:” that is, the Lord is in them, in the commandment; which commandment is holy, as saith the Apostle: “Therefore the law indeed is holy, and the commandment is holy, and just, and good.”…
22. In the next place, turning his address to the Lord Himself, “Thou hast gone up,” he saith, “on high, Thou hast led captivity captive, Thou hast received gifts in men” (ver. 18). Of this the Apostle thus maketh mention, thus expoundeth in speaking of the Lord Christ: “But unto each one of us,” he saith, “is given grace after the measure of the giving of Christ: for which cause he saith, He hath gone up on high, He hath led captive captivity, He hath given gifts to men.”…And let it not move us that the Apostle making mention of that same testimony saith not, “Thou hast received gifts in men;” but, “He hath given gifts unto men.” For he with Apostolic authority hath spoken thus according to the faith that the Son is God with the Father. For in respect of this He hath given gifts to men, sending to them the Holy Spirit, which is the Spirit of the Father and of the Son. But forasmuch as the self-same Christ is understood in His Body which is the Church, wherefore also His members are His saints and believers, whence to them is said, “But ye are the Body of Christ, and the members,” doubtless He hath Himself also received gifts in men. Now Christ hath gone up on high, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father: but unless He were here also on the earth, He would not thence have cried, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” When the Same saith Himself, “Inasmuch as to one of My least ye have done it, to Me ye have done it:” why do we doubt that He receiveth in His members, the gifts which the members of Him receive?
23. But what is, “Thou hast led captivity captive”? Is it because He hath conquered death, which was holding captive those over whom it reigned? Or hath he called men themselves captivity, who were being held captive under the devil? Which thing’s mystery even the title of that Psalm doth contain, to wit, “when the house was being builded after the captivity:” that is, the Church after the coming in of the Gentiles. Calling therefore those very men who were being held captive a captivity, as when “the service” is spoken of there are understood those that serve also, that same captivity he saith by Christ hath been led captive. For why should not captivity be happy, if even for a good purpose men may be caught? Whence to Peter hath been said, “From henceforth thou shalt catch men.” Led captive therefore they are because caught, and caught because subjugated, being sent under that gentle yoke, being delivered from sin whereof they were servants, and being made servants of righteousness whereof they were children. Whence also He is Himself in them, that hath given gifts to men, and hath received gifts in men. And thus in that captivity, in that servitude, in that chariot, under that yoke, there are not thousands of men lamenting, but thousands of men rejoicing. For the Lord is in them, in Sina, in the holy place.…
24. But what next doth he adjoin? “For they that believe not to dwell” (ver. 18): or, as some copies have, “For not believing to dwell:” for what else are men not believing, but they that believe not? To whom this hath been said, is not easy to perceive. For as though a reason were being given of the above words, when it had been said, “Thou hast led captivity captive, Thou hast received gifts in men:” there hath been added in continuation, “for they that believe not to dwell,” that is, not believing that they should dwell. What is this? Of whom saith he this? Did that captivity, before it passed into a good captivity, show whence it was an evil captivity? For through not believing they were possessed by the enemy, “that worketh in the sons of unbelief: among whom ye were sometime, while ye were living among them.” By the gifts therefore of His grace, He that hath received gifts in men, hath led captive that captivity. For they believed not that they should dwell. For faith hath thence delivered them, in order that now believing they may dwell in the House of God, even they too becoming the House of God, and the Chariot of God, consisting of thousands of men rejoicing.
25. Whence he that was singing of these things, in the Spirit foreseeing them, even he too being fulfilled with joy hath burst forth a hymn, saying, “The Lord God is blessed, blessed is the Lord God from day unto day” (ver. 19). Which some copies have, “by day daily,” because the Greeks have it thus, ἡμ™ραν καθ’ ἡμ™ραν: which more exactly would be expressed by, “by day daily.” Which expression I think signifieth the same as that which hath been said, to wit, “from day unto day.” For daily this He doeth even unto the end, He leadeth captive captivity, receiving gifts in men.
