Psalm LXVIII · Part 3 of 4
26. And because He leadeth that chariot unto the end, He continueth and saith, “A prosperous journey there shall make for us the God of our healths, our God, the God of making men safe” (ver. 20). Highly is grace here commended. For who would be safe, unless He Himself should make whole? But that it might not occur to the mind, Why then do we die, if through His grace we have been made safe? immediately he added below, “and the Lord’s is the outgoing of death:” as though he were saying, Why are thou indignant, O lot of humanity, that thou hast the outgoing of death? Even thy Lord’s outgoing was no other than that of death. Rather therefore be comforted than be indignant: for even “the Lord’s is the outgoing of death.” “For by hope we have been saved: but if that which we see not we hope for, through patience we wait for it.” Patiently therefore even death itself let us suffer, by the example of Him, who though by no sin He was debtor to death, and was the Lord, from whom no one could take away life, but Himself laid it down of Himself, yet had Himself the outgoing of death.
27. “Nevertheless, God shall break in pieces the heads of His enemies, the scalp of hair of men walking on in their transgressions” (ver. 21): that is, too much exalting themselves, being too proud in their transgressions: wherein at least they ought to be humble, saying, “O Lord, be Thou merciful to me a sinner.” But He shall break in pieces their heads: for he that exalteth himself shall be humbled. And thus though even of the Lord be the outgoing of death: nevertheless the same Lord, because He was God, and died after the flesh of His own will, not of necessity, “shall break in pieces the heads of His enemies:” not only of those who mocked and crucified Him, and wagged their heads, and said, “If Son of God He is, let Him come down from the Cross;” but also of all men lifting up themselves against His doctrine, and deriding His death as though it were of a man. For that very same One of whom hath been said, “Others He saved, Himself He cannot save,” is the “God of our healths,” and is the “God of saving men:” but for an example of humility and of patience, and to efface the handwriting of our sins, He even willed that the outgoing of death should be His own, that we might not fear that death, but rather this from which He hath delivered us through that. Nevertheless, though mocked and dead, “He shall break in pieces the heads of His enemies,” of whom He saith, “Raise Thou me up, and I shall render to them:” whether it be good things for evil things, while to Himself He subdueth the heads of them believing, or whether just things for unjust things, while He punisheth the heads of them proud. For in either way are shattered and broken the heads of enemies, when from pride they are thrown down, whether by humility being amended, or whether unto the lowest depths of hell being hurled.
28. “The Lord hath said, Out of Basan I will be turned” (ver. 22): or, as some copies have, “Out of Basan I will turn.” For He turneth that we may be safe, of whom above hath been said, “God of our healths, and God of saving men.” For to Him elsewhere also is said, “O God of virtues, turn Thou us, and show Thy face, and safe we shall be.” Also in another place, “Turn us, O God of our healths.” But he hath said, “Out of Basan I will turn.” Basan is interpreted confusion. What is then, I will turn out of confusion, but that there is confounded because of his sins, he that is praying of the mercy of God that they may be put away? Thence it is that the Publican dared not even to lift up his eyes to Heaven: so, on considering himself, was he confounded; but he went down justified, because “the Lord hath said, Out of Basan I will turn.” Basan is also interpreted drought: and rightly the Lord is understood to turn out of drought, that is, out of scarcity. For they that think themselves to be in plenty, though they be famished; and full, though they be altogether empty; are not turned.…“I will turn unto the deep of the sea.” If, “I will turn,” why, “unto the deep of the sea”? Unto Himself indeed the Lord turneth, when savingly He turneth, and He is not surely Himself the deep of the sea. Doth perchance the Latin expression deceive us, and hath there been put “unto the deep,” for a translation of what signifieth “deeply”? For He doth not turn Himself: but He turneth those that in the deep of this world lie sunk down with the weight of sins, in that place where one that is turned saith, “From the depths I have cried to Thee, O Lord.” But if it is not, “I will turn,” but, “I will be turned unto the deep of the sea;” our Lord is understood to have said, how by His own mercy He was turned even unto the deep of the sea, to deliver even those that were sinners in most desperate case. Though in one Greek copy I have found, not, “unto the deep,” but “in the depths,” that is, ἐν βυθοῖς: which strengtheneth the former sense, because even there God turneth to Himself men crying from the depths. And even if He be understood Himself there to be turned, to deliver such sort also, it is not beside the purpose: and so then He turneth, or else to deliver them is so turned, that His foot is stained in blood. Which to the Lord Himself the Prophet speaketh: “That Thy foot may be stained in blood” (ver. 23): that is, in order that they themselves who are turned to Thee, or to deliver whom Thou art turned, though in the deep of the sea by the burden of iniquity they may have been sunk, may make so great proficiency by Thy Grace (for where there hath abounded sin, there hath superabounded grace), that they may become Thy foot among Thy members, to preach Thy Gospel, and for Thy name’s sake drawing out a long martyrdom, even unto blood they may contend. For thus, as I judge, more meetly is perceived His foot stained in blood.
29. Lastly, he addeth, “The tongue of Thy dogs out of enemies by Himself,” calling those very same that had been about to strive for the faith of the Gospel, even dogs, as though barking for their Lord. Not those dogs, whereof saith the Apostle, “Beware of dogs:” but those that eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of their masters. For having confessed this, the woman of Canaan merited to hear, “O woman, great is thy faith, be it done to thee as thou wilt.” Dogs commendable, not abominable; observing fidelity towards their master, and before his house barking against enemies. Not only “of dogs” he hath said, but “of Thy dogs:” nor are their teeth praised, but their tongue is: for it was not indeed to no purpose, not without a great mystery, that Gedeon was bidden to lead those alone, who should lap the water of the river like dogs; and of such sort not more than three hundred among so great a multitude were found. In which number is the sign of the Cross because of the letter T, which in the Greek numeral characters signifieth three hundred. Of such dogs in another Psalm also said, “They shall be turned at even, and hunger they shall suffer as dogs.” For even some dogs have been reproved by the Prophet Isaiah, not because they were dogs, but because they knew not how to bark, and loved to sleep. In which place indeed he hath shown, that if they had watched and barked for their Lord, they would have been praiseworthy dogs: just as they are praised, of whom is said, “The tongue of Thy dogs.”…
30. “There have been seen Thy steps, O God” (ver. 24). The steps are those wherewith Thou hast come through the world, as though in that chariot Thou wast going to traverse the round world; which chariot of clouds He intimateth to be His holy and faithful ones in the Gospel, where He saith, “From this time ye shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds.” Leaving out that coming wherein He shall be Judge of quick and dead, “From this time,” He saith, “ye shall see the Son of Man coming in clouds.” These “Thy steps have been seen,” that is, have been manifested, by the revealing the grace of the New Testament. Whence hath been said, “How beautiful are the feet of them that proclaim peace, that proclaim good things!” For this grace and those steps were lying hid in the Old Testament: but when there came the fulness of time, and it pleased God to reveal His Son, that He might be proclaimed among the Gentiles, “there were seen Thy steps, O God: the steps of my God, of the King who is in the holy place.” In what holy place, save in His Temple? “For the Temple of God is holy,” he saith, “which ye are.”
31. But in order that those steps might be seen, “there went before princes conjoined with men psalming, in the midst of damsels players on timbrels” (ver. 25). The princes are the Apostles: for they went before, that the peoples might come in multitudes. “They went before” proclaiming the New Testament: “conjoined with men psalming,” by whose good works that were even visible, as it were with instruments of praise, God was glorified. But those same princes are “in the midst of damsels players on timbrels,” to wit, in an honourable ministry: for thus in the midst are ministers set over new Churches; for this is “damsels:” with flesh subdued praising God; for this is “players on timbrels,” because timbrels are made of skin dried and stretched.
32. Therefore, that no one should take these words in a carnal sense, and by these words should conceive in his mind certain choral bands of wantonness, he continueth and saith, “In the Churches bless ye the Lord” (ver. 26): as though he were saying, wherefore, when ye hear of damsels, players on timbrels, do ye think of wanton pleasures? “In the Churches bless ye the Lord.” For the Churches are pointed out to you by this mystic intimation: the Churches are the damsels, with new grace decked: the Churches are the players on the timbrels, with chastened flesh being spiritually tuneful. “In the Churches,” then, “bless ye the Lord God from the wells of Israel.” For from thence He first chose those whom He made wells. For from thence were chosen the Apostles; and they first heard, “He that shall have drunk of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but there shall be made in him a well of water springing unto life everlasting.”
33. “There is Benjamin the younger in a trance” (ver. 27). There is Paul the last of the Apostles, who saith, “For even I am an Israelite, out of the seed of Abraham, out of the tribe of Benjamin.” But evidently “in a trance,” all men being amazed at a miracle so great as that of his calling. For a trance is the mind’s going out: which thing sometimes chanceth through fear; but sometimes through some revelation, the mind suffering separation from the corporal senses, in order that that which is to be represented may be represented to the spirit. Whence even thus may be understood that which here hath been written, namely, “in a trance;” for when to that persecutor there had been said from Heaven, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me:” there being taken from him the light of the eyes of flesh, he made answer to the Lord, whom in spirit he saw, but they that were with him heard the voice of him replying, though seeing no one to whom he was speaking. Here also the trance may be understood to be that one of his, whereof he himself speaking, saith, that he knew a man caught up even unto the third Heaven; but whether in the body, or whether out of the body, he knew not: but that he being caught up into Paradise, heard ineffable words, which it was not lawful for a man to speak. “Princes of Juda the leaders of them, princes of Zabulon, princes of Nephthalim.” Since he is indicating the Apostles as princes, wherein is even “Benjamin the younger in a trance,” in which words that Paul is indicated no one doubteth; or when under the name of princes there are indicated in the Churches all men excelling and most worthy of imitation: what mean these names of the tribes of Israel?…For the names are Hebrew: whereof Juda is said to be interpreted confession, Zabulon habitation of strength, Nephthalim my enlargement. All which words do intimate to us the most proper princes of the Church, worthy of their leadership, worthy of imitation, worthy of honours. For the Martyrs in the Churches hold the highest place, and by the crown of holy worth they do excel. But however in martyrdom the first thing is confession, and for this is next put on strength to endure whatsoever shall have chanced; then after all things have been endured, straits being ended, breadth followeth in reward. It may also thus be understood; that whereas the Apostle chiefly commendeth these three things, faith, hope, love; confession is in faith, strength in hope, breadth in love. For of faith the substance is, that with the heart men believe unto righteousness, but with the mouth confession be made unto salvation. But in sufferings of tribulations the thing itself is sorrowful, but the hope is strong. For, “if that which we see not we hope for, through patience we wait for it.” But breadth the shedding abroad of love in the heart doth give. For “love perfected casteth out fear:” which fear “hath torment,” because of the straits of the soul.…
34. “Command, O God, Thy Virtue” (ver. 28). For one is our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we in Him, of whom we read that He is “the Virtue of God and the Wisdom of God.” But how doth God command His Christ, save while He commendeth Him? For “God commendeth His love in us, in that while yet we were sinners, for us Christ died.” “How hath He not also with Him given to us all things?” “Command, O God, Thy Virtue: confirm, O God, that which Thou hast wrought in us.” Command by teaching, confirm by aiding.
35. “From Thy Temple in Jerusalem, to Thee kings shall offer presents” (ver. 29). Jerusalem, which is our free mother, because the same also is Thy holy Temple: from that Temple then, “to Thee kings shall offer presents.” Whatever kings be understood, whether kings of the earth, or whether those whom “He that is above the heavens distinguisheth over the dove silvered;” “to Thee kings shall offer presents.” And what presents are so acceptable as the sacrifices of praise? But there is a noise against this praise, from men bearing the name of Christian, and having diverse opinions. Be there done that which followeth, “Rebuke Thou the beasts of the cane” (ver. 30). For both beasts they are, since by not understanding they do hurt: and beasts of the cane they are, since the sense of the Scriptures they wrest according to their own misapprehension. For in the cane the Scriptures are as reasonably perceived, as language in tongue, according to the mode of expression whereby the Hebrew or the Greek or the Latin tongue is spoken of, or the like; that is to say, by the efficient cause the thing which is being effected is implied. Now it is usual in the Latin language for writing to be called style, because with the stilus it is done: so then cane also, because with a cane it is done. The Apostle Peter saith, that “men unlearned and unstable do wrest the Scriptures to their own proper destruction:” these are the beasts of the cane, whereof here is said, “Rebuke Thou the beasts of the cane.”
36. Concerning these also is that which followeth, “The congregation of bulls amid the cows of the peoples, in order that there may be excluded they that have been tried with silver.” Calling them bulls because of the pride of a stiff and untamed neck: for he is referring to heretics. But by “the cows of the peoples,” I think souls easily led astray must be understood, because easily they follow these bulls. For they lead not astray entire peoples, among whom are men grave and stable; whence hath been written, “In a people grave I will praise Thee:” but only the cows which they may have found among those peoples. “For of these are they that steal into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, who are led with divers lusts, alway learning, and at the knowledge of the truth never arriving.”…For, “may be excluded,” hath been said, meaning, may appear, may stand forth: as he saith, “may be made manifest.” Whence also, in the art of the silversmith, they are called exclusores, who out of the shapelessness of the lump are skilled to mould the form of a vessel. For many meanings of the holy Scriptures are concealed, and are known only to a few of singular intelligence, and are never vindicated so suitably and acceptably as when our diligence to make answer to heretics constraineth us. For then even they that neglect the pursuits of learning, shaking off their slumber, are stirred up to a diligent hearing, in order that their opponents may be refuted. In a word, how many senses of holy Scriptures concerning Christ as God have been vindicated against Photinus, how many concerning Christ as man against Manichæus, how many concerning the Trinity against Sabellius, how many concerning the Unity of the Trinity against Arians, Eunomians, Macedonians? How many concerning the Catholic Church in the whole world spread abroad, against Donatists, and Luciferians, and others, whoever they be, that with like error dissent from the truth: how many against the rest of heretics, whom to enumerate or mention were too long a task, and for the present work unnecessary?…Of whom, as it were bulls, that is, not subject to the peaceful and gentle yoke of discipline, the Apostle maketh mention, in the place where he hath said that such an one must be chosen for the Episcopate as is “able to exhort in sound doctrine and to convince the gainsayers. For there are many unruly;” these are bulls with uplifted neck, impatient of plough and yoke: vain-talkers and leaders astray of minds; which minds this Psalm hath intimated under the name of cows.…
37. “There shall come ambassadors out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall prevent the hands of Him” (ver. 31). Under the name of Egypt or of Ethiopia, he hath signified the faith of all nations, from a part the whole: calling the preachers of reconciliation ambassadors. “For Christ,” he saith, “we have an embassy, God as it were exhorting through us: we beseech you for Christ to be reconciled to God.” Not then of the Israelites alone, whence the Apostles were chosen, but also from the rest of the nations that there should be preachers of Christian peace, in this manner hath been mystically prophesied. But by that which he saith, “shall prevent the hands of Him,” he saith this, shall prevent the vengeance of Him: to wit, by turning to Him, in order that their sins may be forgiven, lest by continuing sinners they be punished. Which thing also in another Psalm is said, “Let us come before the face of Him in confession.” As by hands he signifieth vengeance, so by face, revelation and presence, which will be in the Judgment. Because then, by Egypt and Ethiopia he hath signified the nations of the whole world; immediately he hath subjoined, “to God (are) the kingdoms of the earth.” Not to Sabellius, not to Arius, not to Donatus, not to the rest of the bulls stiff-necked, but “to God (are) the kingdoms of the earth.” But the greater number of Latin copies, and especially the Greek, have the verses so punctuated, that there is not one verse in these words, “to God the kingdoms of the earth,” but, “to God,” is at the end of the former verse, and so there is said, “Ethiopia shall come before the hands of her to God,” and then there followeth in another verse, “Kingdoms of the earth, sing ye to God, psalm ye to the Lord” (ver. 32). By which punctuation, doubtless to be preferred by the agreement of many copies, and those deserving of credit, there seemeth to me to be implied faith which precedeth works: because without the merits of good works through faith the ungodly is justified, just as the Apostle said, “To one believing in Him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness:” in order that afterwards faith itself through love may begin to work. For those alone are to be called good works, which are done through love of God. But these faith must needs go before, so that from thence these may begin, not from these this.…This is faith, whereof to the Church Herself is said in the Song of Songs, “Thou shalt come and shalt pass hence from the beginning of faith.” For She hath come like the chariot of God in thousands of men rejoicing, having a prosperous course, and She hath passed over from this world to the Father: in order that there may come to pass in Her that which the Bridegroom Himself saith, who hath passed hence from this world to the Father, “I will that where I am, these also may be with Me:” but from the beginning of faith. Because then in order that good works may follow, faith doth precede; and there are not any good works, save those which follow faith preceding: nothing else seemeth to have been meant in, “Ethiopia shall come before the hands of her to God,” but, Ethiopia shall believe in God. For thus she “shall come before the hands of her,” that is, the works of her. Of whom, except of Ethiopia herself? For this in the Greek is not ambiguous: for the word “of her” there in the feminine gender most clearly hath been put down. And thus nothing else hath been said than “Ethiopia shall come before her hands to God,” that is, by believing in God she shall come before her works. For, “I judge,” saith the Apostle, “that a man is justified through faith without the works of the Law. Is He God of the Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles?” So then Ethiopia, which seemeth to be the utmost limit of the Gentiles, is justified through faith, without the works of the Law.…For the expression in Greek, χεῖρα αὐτῆς, which most copies have, both of “hand of her” and “her own hand” may be understood: but that which is uncommon in the Greek copies, χειρας αὐτῆς, by both “hands of her” and “her own hands,” in Latin may be expressed.
