Psalm LXVIII · Part 4 of 4
38. Henceforward, as if through prophecy all things had been discoursed of which now we see fulfilled, he exhorteth to the praise of Christ, and next He foretelleth His future Advent. “Kingdoms of earth, sing ye to God, psalm ye to the Lord: psalm ye to God, who hath ascended above the Heaven of Heavens to the East” (ver. 33). Or, as some copies have it, “who hath ascended above the Heaven of Heaven to the East.” In these words he perceiveth not Christ, who believeth not His Resurrection and Ascension. But hath not “to the East,” which he hath added, expressed the very spot; since in the quarters of the East is where He rose again, and whence He ascended? Therefore above the Heaven of Heaven He sitteth at the right hand of the Father. This is what the Apostle saith, “the Same is He that hath ascended above all Heavens.” For what of Heavens doth remain after the Heaven of Heaven? Which also we may call the Heavens of Heavens, just as He hath called the firmament Heaven: which Heaven, however, even as Heavens we read of, in the place where there is written, “and let the waters which are above the Heavens praise the name of the Lord.” And forasmuch as from thence He is to come, to judge quick and dead, observe what followeth: “behold, He shall give His voice, the voice of power.” He that like a lamb before the shearer of Him was without voice, “behold shall give His voice,” and not the voice of weakness, as though to be judged; but “the voice of power,” as though going to judge. For God shall not be hidden, as before, and in the judgment of men not opening His mouth; but “God shall come manifest, our God, and He shall not be silent.” Why do ye despair, ye unbelieving men? Why do ye mock? What saith the evil servant? “My Lord delayeth to come.” “Behold, He shall give His voice, the voice of power.”
39. “Give ye glory to God, above Israel is the magnificence of Him” (ver. 34). Of whom saith the Apostle, “Upon the Israel of God.” For “not all that are out of Israel, are Israelites:” for there is also an Israel after the flesh. Whence he saith, “See ye Israel after the flesh.” “For not they that are sons of the flesh, are sons of God, but sons of promise are counted for a seed.” Therefore at that time when without any intermixture of evil men His people shall be, like a heap purged by the fan, like Israel in whom guile is not, then most pre-eminent “above Israel” shall be “the magnificence” of “Him: and the virtue of Him in the clouds.” For not alone He shall come to judgment, but with the elders of His people: to whom He hath promised that they shall sit upon thrones to judge, who even shall judge angels. These be the clouds.
40. Lastly, lest of anything else the clouds be understood, he hath in continuation added, “Wonderful is God in His saints, the God of Israel” (ver. 35). For at that time even most truly and most fully there shall be fulfilled the name Israel itself, which is one “seeing God:” for we shall see Him as He is. “He Himself shall give virtue and strength to His people, blessed be God:” to His people now frail and weak. For “we have this treasure in earthen vessels.” But then by a most glorious changing even of our bodies, “He Himself shall give virtue and strength to His people.” For this body is sown in weakness, shall rise in virtue. He Himself then shall give the virtue which in His own flesh He hath sent before, whereof the Apostle saith, “the power of His Resurrection.” But strength whereby shall be destroyed the enemy death. Now then of this long and difficultly understood Psalm we have at length by His own aid made an end. “Blessed be God. Amen.”
