The Manner in Which a Lay Person Is to Baptize in Case of Necessity
? 116. What do you mean here by a "lay person"?
By a "lay person" I mean here any one who is not a priest.
All such persons and those not dedicated to the service of the Altar, taken together, are called the "laity," as all those who have received sacred orders or who are dedicated to the service of the Altar, taken together, are called the "clergy."
? 117. What is meant by "in case of necessity?"
In "case of necessity" means here that a person not baptized is in danger of death and there is no priest present to administer the Sacrament.
? 118. How is Baptism given by a "lay person"?
Whoever baptizes must:—
Pour common water on the head or face of the person to be baptized, and say while pouring it:
"I baptize thee, in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the	Holy Ghost."
N.B.—Any person of either sex who has, reached the use of reason can baptize in case of necessity.
? 119. What else is to be observed?
In baptizing: (1) The water must touch the skin and flow; (2) the same person who pours the water must say the words; (3) parents should not baptize their own children, if there be any other person present who knows how to baptize; (4) a man, if he be present and knows how to administer the Sacrament, should baptize in preference to a woman; (5) the person baptizing must have the intention of doing what the Church does; (6) he must not repeat the baptism after giving it once correctly.
? 120. What is this baptism called?
The baptism given in case of necessity is called private baptism to distinguish it from solemn baptism, which is given in the church with all the ceremonies proper to it.
? 121. What do you mean by either sex?
"Either sex" means man or woman; boy or girl; any person competent to baptize.
? 122. When may we say one "has reached the use of reason"?
We may say one "has reached the use of reason" when he knows the difference between good and bad or right and wrong. Persons acquire this knowledge at about the age of seven years.
? 123. What is a Catechism?
A Catechism is a book in the form of questions and answers treating of any subject, especially of religion.
? 124. Of what subject does our Catechism treat?
Our Catechism treats of religion; that is, of the truths we must believe and of the things we must do to serve God.
? 125. Why is it important for us to learn the Catechism?
It is important for us to learn the Catechism because it teaches us how to serve God: and unless we serve God in this world we can not be saved in the next; therefore, our knowledge of the Catechism affects our whole existence.
