Lesson 9: On the Holy Ghost and His Descent Upon the Apostles
? 420. Who is the Holy Ghost?
The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.
? 421. Did the Holy Ghost ever appear?
The Holy Ghost appeared at times under the form of a dove, and again under the form of tongues of fire; for, being a pure spirit without a body, He can take any form.
? 422. Is the Holy Ghost called by other names?
The Holy Ghost is called also the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, the Spirit of Truth and other names given in Holy Scripture.
? 423. From whom does the Holy Ghost proceed?
The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.
? 424. Is the Holy Ghost equal to the Father and the Son?
The Holy Ghost is equal to the Father and the Son, being the same Lord and God as they are.
? 425. On what day did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?
The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles ten days after the Ascension of our Lord; and the day on which He came down upon the Apostles is called Whitsunday, or Pentecost.
? 426. Why is the day on which the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles called Whitsunday?
The day on which the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles is called Whitsunday or White Sunday, probably because the Christians who were baptized on the eve of Pentecost wore white garments for some time afterward, as a mark of the purity bestowed upon their souls by the Sacrament of Baptism.
? 427. Why is this feast called also Pentecost?
This feast is called also Pentecost because Pentecost means the fiftieth; and the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles fifty days after the resurrection of Our Lord.
? 428. How did the Holy Ghost come down upon the Apostles?
The Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in the form of tongues of fire.
? 429. What did the form of tongues of fire denote?
The form of tongues of fire denoted the sacred character and divine authority of the preaching and teaching of the Apostles, by whose words and fervor all men were to be converted to the love of God.
? 430. Who sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles?
Our Lord Jesus Christ sent the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles.
? 431. Did the Apostles know that the Holy Ghost would come down upon	them?
The Apostles knew that the Holy Ghost would come down upon them; for Christ promised His Apostles that after His Ascension He would send the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, to teach them all truths and to abide with them forever.
? 432. Has any one ever denied the existence of the Holy Ghost?
Some persons have denied the existence of the Holy Ghost; others have denied that He is a real person equal to the Father and the Son; but all these assertions are shown to be false by the words of Holy Scripture and the infallible teaching of the Church.
? 433. What are the sins against the Holy Ghost which Our Lord said will not be forgiven either in this world or in the next?
The sins against the Holy Ghost which Our Lord said will not be forgiven either in this world or in the next, are sins committed out of pure malice, and greatly opposed to the mercy of God, and are, therefore, seldom forgiven.
? 434. Why did Christ send the Holy Ghost?
Christ sent the Holy Ghost to sanctify His Church, to enlighten and strengthen the Apostles, and to enable them to preach the Gospel.
? 435. How was the Church sanctified through the coming of the Holy Ghost?
The Church was sanctified through the coming of the Holy Ghost by receiving those graces which Christ had merited for His ministers, the bishops and priests, and for the souls of all those committed to their care.
? 436. How were the Apostles enlightened through the coming of the Holy Ghost?
The Apostles were enlightened through the coming of the Holy Ghost by receiving the grace to remember and understand in its true meaning all that Christ had said and done in their presence.
? 437. How were the Apostles strengthened through the coming of the Holy Ghost?
The Apostles were strengthened through the coming of the Holy Ghost by receiving the grace to brave every danger, even death itself, in the performance of their sacred duties.
? 438. What does "Apostle," and what does "Gospel" mean?
"Apostle" means a person sent, and "Gospel" means good tidings or news. Hence the name "Gospel" is given to the inspired history of Our Lord's life and works upon earth.
? 439. Name the Apostles.
The Apostles were: Peter, Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew, James, Thaddeus, Simon, and Judas Iscariot, in whose place Mathias was chosen.
? 440. Was St. Paul an Apostle?
St. Paul was an Apostle, but as he was not called till after the Ascension of Our Lord he is not numbered among the twelve. He is called the Apostle of the Gentiles; that is, of all those who were not of the Jewish religion or members of the Church of the Old Law.
? 441. How did St. Paul become an Apostle?
While on his way to persecute the Christians St. Paul was miraculously converted and called to be an Apostle by Our Lord Himself, who spoke to him. St. Paul was called Saul before his conversion.
? 442. Who were the Evangelists?
St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke and St. John are called Evangelists, because they wrote the four Gospels bearing their names, and Evangelia is the Latin name for Gospels. St. Mark and St. Luke were not Apostles, but St. Matthew and St. John were both Apostles and Evangelists.
? 443. Why did not the Apostles fully understand when Christ Himself taught them?
The Apostles did not fully understand when Christ Himself taught them because during His stay with them on earth they were only preparing to become Apostles; and their minds were yet filled with many worldly thoughts and desires that were to be removed at the coming of the Holy Ghost.
? 444. Will the Holy Ghost abide with the Church forever?
The Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever, and guide it in the way of holiness and truth.
? 445. What benefit do we derive from the knowledge that the Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever?
From the knowledge that the Holy Ghost will abide with the Church forever we are made certain that the Church can never teach us falsehood, and can never be destroyed by the enemies of Our Faith.
? 446. What visible power was given to the Apostles through the coming of the Holy Ghost?
Through the coming of the Holy Ghost the Apostles received the "gift of tongues," by which they could be understood in every language, though they preached in only one.
? 447. Why did such wonderful gifts accompany Confirmation, or the coming of the Holy Ghost, in the first ages of the Church?
Such wonderful gifts accompanied Confirmation in the first ages of the Church to prove the power, truth and divine character of Christianity to those who otherwise might not believe, and to draw the attention of all to the establishment of the Christian Church.
? 448. Why are these signs not continued everywhere at the present time?
These signs are not continued everywhere at the present time, because now that the Church is fully established and its divine character and power proved in other ways, such signs are no longer necessary.
? 449. Were such powers as the "gift of tongues" a part of the Sacrament of Confirmation?
Such powers as the "gift of tongues" were not a part of the Sacrament of Confirmation, but they were added to it by the Holy Ghost when necessary for the good of the Church.
