Lesson 33: From the Fourth to the Seventh Commandment
? 1257. What is the fourth Commandment?
The fourth Commandment is: Honor thy father and thy mother.
? 1258. What does the word "honor" in this commandment include?
The word "honor" in this commandment includes the doing of everything necessary for our parents' spiritual and temporal welfare, the showing of proper respect, and the fulfillment of all our duties to them.
? 1259. What are we commanded by the fourth Commandment?
We are commanded by the fourth Commandment to honor, love and obey our parents in all that is not sin.
? 1260. Why should we refuse to obey parents or superiors who command us to sin?
We should refuse to obey parents or superiors who command us to sin because they are not then acting with God's authority, but contrary to it and in violation of His laws.
? 1261. Are we bound to honor and obey others than our parents?
We are also bound to honor and obey our bishops, pastors, magistrates, teachers, and other lawful superiors.
? 1262. Who are meant by magistrates?
By magistrates are meant all officials of whatever rank who have a lawful right to rule over us and our temporal possessions or affairs.
? 1263. Who are meant by lawful superiors?
By lawful superiors are meant all persons to whom we are in any way subject, such as employers or others under whose authority we live or work.
? 1264. What is the duty of servants or workmen to their employers?
The duty of servants or workmen to their employers is to serve them faithfully and honestly, according to their agreement, and to guard against injuring their property or reputation.
? 1265. Have parents and superiors any duties toward those who	are under their charge?
It is the duty of parents and superiors to take good care of all under their charge and give them proper direction and example.
? 1266. If parents or superiors neglect their duty or abuse their authority in any particular, should we follow their direction and example in that particular?
If parents or superiors neglect their duty or abuse their authority in any particular we should not follow their direction or example in that particular, but follow the dictates of our conscience in the performance of our duty.
? 1267. What is the duty of employers to their servants or workmen?
The duty of employers to their servants or workmen is to see that they are kindly and fairly treated and provided for, according to their agreement, and that they are justly paid their wages at the proper time.
? 1268. What is forbidden by the fourth Commandment?
The fourth Commandment forbids all disobedience, contempt, and stubbornness towards our parents or lawful superiors.
? 1269. What is meant by contempt and stubbornness?
By contempt is meant wilful disrespect for lawful authority, and by stubbornness is meant wilful determination not to yield to lawful authority.
? 1270. What is the fifth Commandment?
The fifth Commandment is: Thou shalt not kill.
? 1271. What killing does this commandment forbid?
This commandment forbids the killing only of human beings.
? 1272. How do we know that this commandment forbids the killing only of human beings?
We know that this commandment forbids the killing only of human beings because, after giving this commandment, God commanded that animals be killed for sacrifice in the temple of Jerusalem, and God never contradicts Himself.
? 1273. What are we commanded by the fifth Commandment?
We are commanded by the fifth Commandment to live in peace and union with our neighbor, to respect his rights, to seek his spiritual and bodily welfare, and to take proper care of our own life and health.
? 1274. What sin is it to destroy one's own life, or commit suicide, as this act is called?
It is a mortal sin to destroy one's own life or commit suicide, as this act is called, and persons who wilfully and knowingly commit such an act die in a state of mortal sin and are deprived of Christian burial. It is also wrong to expose one's self unnecessarily to the danger of death by rash or foolhardy feats of daring.
? 1275. Is it ever lawful for any cause to deliberately and intentionally take away the life of an innocent person?
It is never lawful for any cause to deliberately and intentionally take away the life of an innocent person. Such deeds are always murder, and can never be excused for any reason, however important or necessary.
? 1276. Under what circumstances may human life be lawfully taken?
Human life may be lawfully taken (1) In self-defense, when we are unjustly attacked and have no other means of saving our own lives; (2) in a just war, when the safety or rights of the nation require it; (3) by the lawful execution of a criminal, fairly tried and found guilty of a crime punishable by death when the preservation of law and order and the good of the community require such execution.
? 1277. What is forbidden by the fifth Commandment?
The fifth Commandment forbids all wilful murder, fighting, anger, hatred, revenge, and bad example.
? 1278. Can the fifth commandment be broken by giving scandal or bad example and by inducing others to sin?
The fifth commandment can be broken by giving scandal or bad example and inducing others to sin, because such acts may destroy the life of the soul by leading it into mortal sin.
? 1279. What is scandal?
Scandal is any sinful word, deed or omission that disposes others to sin, or lessens their respect for God and holy religion.
? 1280. Why are fighting, anger, hatred and revenge forbidden by the fifth commandment?
Fighting, anger, hatred and revenge are forbidden by the fifth commandment because they are sinful in themselves and may lead to murder. The commandments forbid not only whatever violates them, but also whatever may lead to their violation.
? 1281. What is the sixth Commandment?
The sixth Commandment is: Thou shalt not commit adultery.
? 1282. What are we commanded by the sixth Commandment?
We are commanded by the sixth Commandment to be pure in thought and modest in all our looks, words, and actions.
? 1283. It is a sin to listen to immodest conversation, songs or jokes?
It is a sin to listen to immodest conversation, songs or jokes when we can avoid it, or to show in any way that we take pleasure in such things.
? 1284. What is forbidden by the sixth Commandment?
The sixth Commandment forbids all unchaste freedom with another's wife or husband; also all immodesty with ourselves or others in looks, dress, words, and actions.
? 1285. Why are sins of impurity the most dangerous?
Sins of impurity are the most dangerous (1) Because they have the most numerous temptations; (2) because, if deliberate, they are always mortal, and (3) because, more than other sins, they lead to the loss of faith.
? 1286. Does the sixth Commandment forbid the reading of bad and immodest books and newspapers?
The sixth Commandment does forbid the reading of bad and immodest books and newspapers.
? 1287. What should be done with immodest book and newspapers?
Immodest books and newspapers should be destroyed as soon as possible, and if we cannot destroy them ourselves we should induce their owners to do so.
? 1288. What books does the Church consider bad?
The Church considers bad all books containing teaching contrary to faith or morals, or that wilfully misrepresent Catholic doctrine and practice.
? 1289. What places are dangerous to the virtue of purity?
Indecent theaters and similar places of amusement are dangerous to the virtue of purity, because their entertainments are frequently intended to suggest immodest things.
