Lesson 36: On the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Commandments of the Church
? 1349. What is meant by the command of confessing at least once a year?
By the command of confessing at least once a year is meant that we are obliged, under pain of mortal sin, to go to confession within the year.
? 1350. Should we confess only once a year?
We should confess frequently, if we wish to lead a good life.
? 1351. Should we go to confession at our usual time even if we think we have not committed sin since our last confession?
We should go to confession at our usual time even if we think we have not committed sin since our last confession, because the Sacrament of Penance has for its object not only to forgive sins, but also to bestow grace and strengthen the soul against temptation.
? 1352. Should children go to confession?
Children should go to confession when they are old enough to commit sin, which is commonly about the age of seven years.
? 1353. What sin does he commit who neglects to receive Communion	during the Easter time?
He who neglects to receive Communion during the Easter time commits a mortal sin.
? 1354. What is the Easter time?
The Easter time is, in this country, the time between the first Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday.
? 1355. When is Trinity Sunday?
Trinity Sunday is the Sunday after Pentecost, or eight weeks after Easter Sunday; so that there are fourteen weeks in which one may comply with the command of the Church to receive Holy Communion between the first Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday.
? 1356. Are we obliged to contribute to the support of our	pastors?
We are obliged to contribute to the support of our pastors, and to bear our share in the expense of the Church and school.
? 1357. Where did the duty of contributing to the support of the Church and clergy originate?
The duty of contributing to the support of the Church and clergy originated in the Old Law, when God commanded all the people to contribute to the support of the temple and of its priests.
? 1358. What does the obligation of supporting the Church and school imply?
The obligation of supporting the Church and school implies the duty of making use of the Church and school by attending religious worship in the one and by giving Catholic education in the other; because if the Church and school were not necessary for our spiritual welfare we would not be commanded to support them.
? 1359. Does the fifth commandment of the Church include the support only of our pastors and the Church and school?
The fifth commandment of the Church includes the support also of our holy father, the Pope, bishops, priests, missions, religious institutions and religion in general.
? 1360. What is the meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third degree of kindred?
The meaning of the commandment not to marry within the third degree of kindred is that no one is allowed to marry another within the third degree of blood relationship.
? 1361. Who are in the third degree of blood relationship?
Second cousins are in the third degree of blood relationship, and persons whose relationship is nearer than second cousins are in closer degrees of kindred. It is unlawful for persons thus related to marry without a dispensation or special permission of the Church.
? 1362. Are there other relationships besides blood relationship that render marriage unlawful without a dispensation?
There are other relationships besides blood relationship that render marriage unlawful without a dispensation, namely, the relationships contracted by marriage, which are called degrees of affinity, and the relationship contracted by being sponsors at Baptism, which is called spiritual affinity.
? 1363. What should persons about to marry do, if they suspect they are related to each other?
Persons about to marry, if they suspect they are related to each other, should make known the facts to the priest, that he may examine the degree of relationship and procure a dispensation if necessary.
? 1364. What is the meaning of the command not to marry	privately?
The command not to marry privately means that none should marry without the blessing of God's priests or without witnesses.
? 1365. What sin is it for Catholics to be married before the minister of another religion?
It is a mortal sin for Catholics to be married before the minister of another religion, and they who attempt to do so incur excommunication, and absolution from their sin is reserved to the bishop.
? 1366. What is the meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden times?
The meaning of the precept not to solemnize marriage at forbidden times is that during Lent and Advent the marriage ceremony should not be performed with pomp or a nuptial Mass.
? 1367. What is the nuptial Mass?
The nuptial Mass is a Mass appointed by the Church to invoke a special blessing upon the married couple.
? 1368. Should Catholics be married at a nuptial Mass?
Catholics should be married at a nuptial Mass, because they thereby show greater reverence for the holy Sacrament and bring richer blessings upon their wedded life.
? 1369. What restrictions does the Church place on the ceremonies of marriage when one of the persons is not a Catholic?
The Church places several restrictions on the ceremonies of marriage when one of the persons is not a Catholic. The marriage cannot take place in the church; the priest cannot wear his sacred vestments nor use holy water nor bless the ring nor the marriage itself. The Church places these restrictions to show her dislike for such marriages, commonly called mixed marriages.
? 1370. Why does the Church dislike mixed marriages?
The Church dislikes mixed marriages because such marriages are frequently unhappy, give rise to many disputes, endanger the faith of the Catholic member of the family, and prevent the religious education of the children.
