October
1
ALWAYS give good example: teach virtue by word and deed. Example is more powerful than discourse.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
2
If thou wouldst glory, let it be in the Lord, by referring everything to Him, and giving to Him all the honor and glory.—VEN. LOUIS DE GRANADA.
3
There is nothing more holy, more eminently perfect, than resignation to the will of God, which confirms us in an entire detachment from ourselves, and a perfect indifference for every condition in which we may be placed.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
4
Prayer consists not in many words, but in the fervor of desire, which raises the soul to God by the knowledge of its own nothingness and the divine goodness.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
5
Let us make up for lost time. Let us give to God the time that remains to us.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
6
When thou feelest thyself excited, shut thy mouth and chain thy tongue.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
7
If it was necessary that Christ should suffer and so enter by the cross into the kingdom of His Father, no friend of God should shrink from suffering.—VEN. JOHN TAULER.
8
We should grieve to see no account made of time, which is so precious; to see it employed so badly, so uselessly, for it can never be recalled.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
9
Every time that some unexpected event befalls us, be it affliction, or be it spiritual or corporal consolation, we should endeavor to receive it with equanimity of spirit, since all comes from the hand of God.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
10
There are some who sin through frailty, or through the force of some violent passion. They desire to break these chains of death; if their prayer is constant they will be heard.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
11
"Thy will be done!" This is what the saints had continually on their lips and in their hearts.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
12
He who would be a disciple of Jesus Christ must live in sufferings; for "The servant is not greater than the Master."—VEN. JOHN TAULER.
13
He who submits himself to God in all things is certain that whatever men say or do against him will always turn to his advantage.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
14
If he be blind who refuses to believe in the truths of the Catholic faith, how much blinder is he who believes, and yet lives as if he did not believe!—ST. ALPHONSUS.
15
There is no affliction, trial, or labor difficult to endure, when we consider the torments and sufferings which Our Lord Jesus Christ endured for us.—ST. TERESA.
16
Outside of God nothing is durable. We exchange life for death, health for sickness, honor for shame, riches for poverty. All things change and pass away.—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
17
If you would keep yourself pure, shun dangerous occasions. Do not trust your own strength. In this matter we can not take too much precaution.— ST. ALPHONSUS.
18
After knowing the will of God in regard to a work which we undertake, we should continue courageously, however difficult it may be. We should follow it to the end with as much constancy as the obstacles we encounter are great.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
19
In your prayers, if you would quickly and surely draw upon you the grace of God, pray in a special manner for our Holy Church and all those connected with it.—VEN. LOUIS DE BLOIS.
20
Prayer is our principal weapon. By it we obtain of God the victory over our evil inclinations, and over all temptations of hell.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
21
We should never abandon, on account of the difficulties we encounter, an enterprise undertaken with due reflection.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
22
Being all members of the same body, with the same head, who is Christ, it is proper that we should have in common the same joys and sorrows.— VEN. LOUIS DE GRANADA.
23
We should be cordial and affable with the poor, and with persons in humble circumstances. We should not treat them in a supercilious manner. Haughtiness makes them revolt. On the contrary, when we are affable with them, they become more docile and derive more benefit from the advice they receive.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
24
Let not confusion for thy fault overwhelm thee with despair, as if there were no longer a remedy.—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
25
As all our wickedness consists in turning away from our Creator, so all our goodness consists in uniting ourselves with Him.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
26
That which we suffer in the accomplishment of a good work, merits for us the necessary graces to insure its success.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
27
We ought to have a special devotion to those saints who excelled in humility, particularly to the Blessed Virgin Mary, who declares that the Lord regarded her on account of her humility.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
28
He who wishes to find Jesus should seek Him, not in the delights and pleasures of the world, but in mortification of the senses.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
29
Let us not despise, judge, or condemn any one but ourselves; then our cross will bloom and bear fruit.—VEN. JOHN TAULER.
30
It is rarely that we fall into error if we are humble and trust to the wisdom of others, in preference to our own judgment.—VEN. LOUIS DE BLOIS.
31
The best of all prayers is that in which we ask that God's holy will be accomplished, both in ourselves and in others.—VEN. LOUIS DE BLOIS.
