November
1
WE SHOULD honor God in His saints, and beseech Him to make us partakers of the graces He poured so abundantly upon them.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
2
We may have a confident hope of our salvation when we apply ourselves to relieve the souls in purgatory, so afflicted and so dear to God.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
3
The example of the saints is proposed to every one, so that the great actions shown us may encourage us to undertake smaller things.—VEN. LOUIS DE GRANADA.
4
Let us read the lives of the saints; let us consider the penances which they performed, and blush to be so effeminate and so fearful of mortifying our flesh.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
5
The greatest pain which the holy souls suffer in purgatory proceeds from their desire to possess God. This suffering especially afflicts those who in life had but a feeble desire of heaven.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
6
Death is welcome to one who has always feared God and faithfully served Him.—ST. TERESA.
7
True humility consists in being content with all that God is pleased to ordain for us, believing ourselves unworthy to be called His servants.— ST. TERESA.
8
The best preparation for death is a perfect resignation to the will of God, after the example of Jesus Christ, who, in His prayer in Gethsemani prepared Himself with these words, "Father, not as I will, but as Thou wilt."—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
9
The errors of others should serve to keep us from adding any of our own to them.—ST. IGNATIUS.
10
There is more security in self-denial, mortification, and other like virtues, than in an abundance of tears.—ST. TERESA.
11
A resolute will triumphs over everything with the help of God, which is never wanting.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
12
If humble souls are contradicted, they remain calm; if they are calumniated, they suffer with patience; if they are little esteemed, neglected, or forgotten, they consider that their due; if they are weighed down with occupations, they perform them cheerfully.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
13
When we have to reply to some one who speaks harshly to us, we must always do it with gentleness. If we are angry, it is better to keep silence.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
14
The two principal dispositions which we should bring to holy communion are detachment from creatures, and the desire to receive Our Lord with a view to loving Him more in the future.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
15
In doing penance it is necessary to deprive oneself of as many lawful pleasures as we had the misfortune to indulge in unlawful ones.—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.
16
In raising human nature to heaven by His ascension, Christ has given us the hope of arriving thither ourselves.—ST. THOMAS AQUINAS.
17
It is useless to subdue the flesh by abstinence, unless one gives up his irregular life, and abandons vices which defile his soul.—ST. BENEDICT.
18
No prayers are so acceptable to God as those which we offer Him after communion.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
19
It avails nothing to subdue the body, if the mind allows itself to be controlled by anger.—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.
20
What is it that renders death terrible? Sin. We must therefore fear sin, not death.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
21
The Blessed Virgin is of all the works of the Creator the most excellent, and to find anything in nature more grand one must go to the Author of nature Himself.—ST. PETER DAMIAN.
22
If we would advance in virtue, we must not neglect little things, for they pave the way to greater.—ST. TERESA.
23
When one has fallen into some fault, what better remedy can there be than to have immediate recourse to the Most Blessed Sacrament?—ST. ALPHONSUS.
24
Afflictions are the most certain proofs that God can give us of His love for us.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
25
Is it not a great cruelty for us Christians, members of the body of the Holy Church, to attack one another?—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
26
The Church is the pillar and ground of truth, and her infallibility admits of no doubt.—VEN. LOUIS DE GRANADA.
27
He who truly loves his neighbor and can not efficaciously assist him, should strive at least to relieve and help him by his prayers.—ST. TERESA.
28
We should blush for shame to show so much resentment at what is done or said against us, knowing that so many injuries and affronts have been offered to our Redeemer and the saints.—ST. TERESA.
29
The reason why so many souls who apply themselves to prayer are not inflamed with God's love is, that they neglect to carefully prepare themselves for it.—ST. TERESA.
30
It is absolutely necessary, both for our advancement and the salvation of others, to follow always and in all things the beautiful light of faith.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
