April
1
TO PUT into practice the teachings of our holy faith, it is not enough to convince ourselves that they are true; we must love them. Love united to faith makes us practise our religion.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
2
Unite all your works to the merits of Jesus Christ, and then offer them up to the eternal Father if you desire to make them pleasing to Him.— ST. TERESA.
3
God pardons sin; but He will not pardon the will to sin.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
4
It is a fault, not a virtue, to wish your humility recognized and applauded.—ST. BERNARD.
5
Before engaging in your private devotions, perform those which obedience and your duty toward your neighbor impose upon you in such a manner as to make an abnegation of self.—VEN. LOUIS DE BLOIS.
6
The world is full of inconstancy; its friendship ceases the moment there is no advantage to be expected from us.—BL. JOHN TAULER.
7
There is nothing better to display the truth in an excellent light, than a clear and simple statement of facts.—ST. BENEDICT.
8
Be careful and do not lightly condemn the actions of others. We must consider the intention of our neighbor, which is often good and pure, although the act itself seems blameworthy.—ST. IGNATIUS.
9
He who does not overcome his predominant passion is in great danger of being lost. He who does overcome it will easily conquer all the rest.— ST. ALPHONSUS.
10
To conquer himself is the greatest victory that man can gain.—ST. IGNATIUS.
11
A soul which does not practise the exercise of prayer is very like a paralyzed body which, though possessing feet and hands, makes no use of them.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
12
When you do a good action, have the intention of first pleasing God, and then of giving good example to your neighbor.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
13
The grace of perseverance is the most important of all; it crowns all other graces.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
14
Prayer is the only channel through which God's great graces and favors may flow into the soul; and if this be once closed, I know no other way He can communicate them.—ST. TERESA.
15
To acquire courage it is very useful to read the lives of the saints, especially of those who, after living in sin, attained great sanctity.— ST. ALPHONSUS.
16
The truly humble reject all praise for themselves, and refer it all to God.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
17
Prayer should be effective and practical, since it has for its end the acquisition of solid virtue and the mortification of the passions.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
18
We do not keep an account of the graces which God has given us, but God our Lord keeps an account of them. He has fixed the measure thereof.— ST. ALPHONSUS.
19
The more guilty we are, the greater must be our confidence in Mary. Therefore, courage, timid soul; let Mary know all thy misery, and hasten with joy to the throne of mercy.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
20
Evil is often more hurtful to the doer than to the one against whom it is done.—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
21
During life despise that which will avail you nothing at the hour of death.—ST. ANSELM.
22
He who fails to reflect before acting, walks with his eyes shut and advances with danger. He also falls very often, because the eye of reflection does not enable him to see whither his footsteps lead.—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.
23
Sanctity and perfection consist not in fine words, but in good actions.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
24
As patience leads to peace, and study to science, so are humiliations the path that leads to humility.—ST. BERNARD.
25
Do not disturb yourself with vain curiosity concerning the affairs of others, nor how they conduct themselves, unless your position makes it your duty to do so.—VEN. LOUIS DE BLOIS.
26
The deceitful charms of prosperity destroy more souls than all the scourges of adversity.—ST. BERNARD.
27
The first degree of humility is the fear of God, which we should constantly have before our eyes.—VEN. LOUIS DE BLOIS.
28
He who cheerfully endures contempt and is happy under crosses and affliction, partakes of the humility and sufferings of Our Lord.—ST. MECHTILDIS.
29
He who is resigned to the divine will shall always surmount the difficulties he meets with in the service of God. The Lord will accomplish His designs concerning him.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
30
Consent to suffer a slight temporary pain, that so thou mayst avoid the eternal pains which sin deserves.—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
