September
1
HE who perseveres with constancy and fervor will, without fail, raise himself to a high degree of perfection.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
2
An upright intention is the soul of our actions. It gives them life, and makes them good.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
3
You wish to reform the world: reform yourself, otherwise your efforts will be in vain.—ST. IGNATIUS.
4
Let all thy care be to possess thy soul in peace and tranquillity. Let no accident be to thee a cause of ill-humor.—ST. VINCENT FERRER.
5
Humility is a fortified town; it repels all attacks. The sight of it obliges the enemy to turn and flee.—VEN. LOUIS OF GRANADA.
6
The world is deceitful and inconstant. When fortune forsakes us, friendship takes flight.—BL. HENRY SUSO.
7
Perform all your actions in union with the pure intention and perfect love with which Our Lord did all things for the glory of God and the salvation of the world.—ST. MECHTILDIS.
8
An air of meekness and a modest speech are pleasing alike to God and men.—VEN. JOHN TAULER.
9
The saints owed to their confidence in God that unalterable tranquillity of soul, which procured their perpetual joy and peace, even in the midst of adversities.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
10
Look not to the qualities thou mayest possess, which are wanting to others; but look to those which others possess and which are wanting to thee, that thou mayest acquire them.—VEN. LOUIS DE GRANADA.
11
Your heart is not so narrow that the world can satisfy it entirely; nothing but God can fill it.—ST. IGNATIUS.
12
If you wish to raise a lofty edifice of perfection, take humility for a foundation.—ST. THOMAS AQUINAS.
13
It ordinarily happens that God permits those who judge others, to fall into the same or even greater faults.—ST. VINCENT FERRER.
14
Raise thy heart and thy love toward the sweet and most holy cross, which soothes every pain!—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
15
Often read spiritual books; then, like a sheep, ruminate the food thou hast taken, by meditation and a desire to practise the holy doctrine found therein.—ST. ANTONINUS.
16
Love others much, but visit them seldom.—ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA.
17
God sends us trials and afflictions to exercise us in patience and teach us sympathy with the sorrows of others.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
18
Armed with prayer, the saints sustained a glorious warfare and vanquished all their enemies. By prayer, also, they appeased the wrath of God, and obtained from Him all they desired.—VEN. LOUIS DE GRANADA.
19
All souls in hell are there because they did not pray. All the saints sanctified themselves by prayer.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
20
The thought of the presence of God renders us familiar with the practice of doing in all things His holy will.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
21
If we consider the number and excellence of the virtues practised by the saints, we must feel the inefficiency and imperfection of our actions.— ST. VINCENT FERRER.
22
Prayer without fervor has not sufficient strength to rise to heaven.— ST. BERNARD.
23
The path of virtue is painful to nature when left to itself; but nature, assisted by grace, finds it easy and agreeable.—VEN. LOUIS OF GRANADA.
24
Always give the preference to actions which appear to you the most agreeable to God, and most contrary to self-love.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
25
As the branch separated from the roots soon loses all life and verdure, so it is with good works which are not united with charity.—ST. GREGORY THE GREAT.
26
We should constantly thank the Lord for having granted us the gift of the true faith, by associating us with the children of the holy Catholic Church.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
27
We should not spare expense, fatigue, nor even our life, when there is a question of accomplishing the holy will of God.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
28
Some are unable to fast or give alms; there are none who can not pray.— ST. ALPHONSUS.
29
We meet with contradictions everywhere. If only two persons are together they mutually afford each other opportunities of exercising patience, and even when one is alone there will still be a necessity for this virtue, so true it is that our miserable life is full of crosses.—ST. VINCENT DE PAUL.
30
We should bear our sufferings in expiation for our sins, to merit heaven, and to please God.—ST. ALPHONSUS.
