Chapter IV
## Last Years of St. Columba—his Saintly Death
NOT small, we may suppose, was the joy of the community at Hy on beholding once more in the midst of them their dear father in Christ; nor was his own less. It must, indeed, have been consoling to him to find himself once more in the calm seclusion of his cloister, after the noisy world whence he had just emerged. To hear again the vesper peal and matin toll in the still midnight—to view "at golden prime" (if, indeed, he looked upon) the angelic features of "those meek ones," to whom the Lord, for whom they had "left all," had given the inheritance "of the land." Truly, our saint could better relish those delights on returning from the external world, as things are better appreciated by contrast.
It was now the year of our Lord 593, and thirty years had our earth performed her revolution round the brilliant orb which illumines her, since Columba had settled in that lonely and sequestered isle. He had often prayed to the Most High that, at the termination of such a period, he might pass from this exile, and he now looked with confidence for the grant of his request. But, while indulging in this delightful anticipation, blessed angels were sent to apprise him that, in consideration of the prayers poured forth by the British and Scottish churches, it was decreed in heaven that he should yet remain four years more on earth. The tidings cost him many tears, but they were accompanied with perfect submission to the divine will, the blessed man at once renouncing his anxiety "to be then dissolved, and go to Christ," since such was His good pleasure. With greater earnestness than ever, did he now labor to consummate his perfection, and attain more and greater sanctity. We have already spoken of his corporal austerity, but this was only one virtue, Columba was eminent in all. One thing particularly distinguished him, great cheerfulness of countenance and mildness of disposition; and this is no small matter, for nothing edifies us more than that those who profess to serve God, should be cordially sweet and amiable to men. Columba, too, was a great lover of labor; he knew not what it was to be unemployed, but continually occupied himself, when not engrossed by missionary duties, in "praying, reading, writing," as the devout á Kempis says, and "in doing something for the common good." And these were greater things than the gifts of prophecy and miracles which he possessed in an eminent degree.
At length the four years, which were to terminate the labors of the holy man, were drawing to their close. It was Saturday, the 8th of June, and with that calm serenity and imperturbable peace with which saints die, Columba, attended by Diermit, one of his monks, proceeded to examine if there was a sufficient supply of corn in the granary to supply his dear children with bread until the new harvest should he reaped. Having discovered that there was, he blessed the barn, and being quite satisfied that all his obligations to the brethren were now fulfilled, he revealed to Diermit, with an injunction of secrecy, that his hour was come, and that he should be called out of life before the next day had dawned. The monk thereupon besought him to impart his benediction to the monastery; he complied, standing on the summit of an adjoining eminence. He then returned to his poor cell, and continued transcribing a portion of the Holy Scripture [1] until the bell summoned all to choir, when, closing the last page with the appropriate verse, "Inquirentes autem Dominum non deficient omni bono"—"They who seek the Lord shall not want any good," (Ps. 33,) he said, "Let Bailhen (his successor in the abbacy) finish the rest," and then proceeded to the church with the rest of the community. The devotions being ended, he returned to his cell, and there reclining on his rocky couch, delivered some instructions to Diermit to be communicated to the brethren. At midnight, the tolling of the bell summoned the monks again to prayer, and the holy abbot, the first to respond to the call, was already in the church and in earnest prayer, before any one had arrived. Diermit was the first who appeared, and he found the saint, his strength rapidly declining, quite absorbed in God as he lay before the altar. In an instant all the monks were assembled about him, and bitterly bewailed their loss. The holy man had still sufficent strength left to recognize them, and looking upon them, "his brow" irradiated by "heaven's own smile," he, with Diermit's help, raised his right hand, and thus imparted to them his saintly benediction. Soon after, on Sunday morning, the 9th of June, he passed to a glorious immortality.
For three days, and as many nights, the obsequies of St. Columba were unremittingly celebrated; and at the close of that time, his sacred remains were, with all religious solemnity, deposited in the tomb. His memory was for ages most dear to the northern nations, his monastery was selected for the sepulchres of the kings of Ireland, Scotland, and Norway; and the provincial bishops, though preserving in their episcopal functions the superiority of their rank, submitted in other points to the mandate of the abbot of Hy, as the legitimate successor of St. Columba. Singular honor this, and unparalleled in church history; but far greater honor did the saint receive, and greater bliss does he now enjoy in the glorious kingdom of which holy David said, "Saturabor cum apparuit gloria tua"—"I shall be satisfied when thy glory appears."
[1] Transcribing holy books was a favorite occupation of Saint Columba. He left behind him 100 manuscripts, says A. Butler. (Lives of Saints, 9th June.) "The celebrated Book of Kells is the autograph of St. Columba, and consists of a copy of the four Gospels. One of the first paintings in this wonderful volume, (for there are several, all proving that even in the 6th century we had in Ireland a style of illumination peculiarly national, and for the age of no small merit,) is the Blessed Virgin with our infant Saviour in her arms, a halo of glory round her head, and angels above her. In the last page is written, I beseech your Blessedness, holy Presbyter Patrick, that whosoever holds this book may remember Columba." Dub. Review, June, 1846
