Part I: Faith · The Creed: First Article
The First Article.
' I believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth.'
§ 1. On God and His Attributes or Perfections.
'I believe in God.'
? 3. Who is God?
God is an infinitely perfect Spirit, the Lord of Heaven and earth, and the Author of all good.
? 4. Can we see God?
No; we cannot see God with corporeal eyes, because He is a Spirit.
? 5. How, then, can we come to a knowledge of God?
God has made Himself known to us in two ways; that is, in a natural, and in a supernatural way.
? 6. How has God made Himself known to man in a natural way?
1. By the visible world, which He has created and continually governs; for nobody can reasonably think that the world has made itself, or that the regular and perfect order in it originated and subsists by itself. Only 'the fool hath said in his heart. There is no God' (Ps. xiii. 1).
Therefore St. Paul says of the Gentiles that they are inexcusable, if they do not believe in God: For the invisible things of Him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made: His eternal power also, and Divinity' (Rom. i. 20). 'Nevertheless He left not Himself without testimony, doing good from Heaven, giving rains and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness' (Acts xiv. 16; comp. Wisdom 13).
2. By the voice of conscience, which admonishes us to dread an invisible avenger of sin, and to hope in a rewarder of virtue (Rom. ii. 15).
Conscience has not been made by man. Its action is often so painful that man would prefer, if he could, to be without it. It exists in us by the will of God, who made it an essential part of our human nature, in order that we might be taught by its voice,
? 7. How has God made Himself known to man in a supernatural manner?
By the Revelation, which He has given us by the Prophets, and last of all by His Son. (See p. 75, quest. 10.)
'No man hath seen God at any time; the Only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him' (John i. 18).
? 8. Why do we say, 'I believe in God,' and not only, 'I believe God'?
Because we must not only believe that there is a God, and that all that He has said is true; but we must likewise give ourselves up to God with love and confidence.
? 9. Why do we call God a 'Spirit'?
We call God a Spirit because He has understanding and free will, but no body (John iv. 24).
? 10. And why do we say that 'God is infinitely perfect'?
Because God is not like created beings, good only in some measure, but because He unites in Himself all good perfections without measure, or bounds, or number.
? 11. Which are the principal Attributes or Perfections of God?
These: God is eternal and unchangeable, omnipresent, omniscient or all-knowing, all-wise, all-powerful; He is infinitely holy and just; infinitely good, merciful, and long-suffering; infinitely true and faithful.
? 12. What means 'God is eternal'?
God is eternal means that He is always, without beginning and without end.
'Before the mountains were made, or the earth and the world was formed; from eternity to eternity Thou art God' (Ps. lxxxix. 2).
? 13. What means 'God is unchangeable'?
God is unchangeable means that He remains eternally the same, without any change either in Himself or in His decrees.
'With whom [God] there is no change, nor shadow of alteration' (James i. 17). 'My counsel shall stand, and all my will shall be done' (Isai. xlvi. 10).
? 14. What ought we to do, since God is eternal and unchangeable?
We ought to serve and love Him for ever and ever.
'Thou art the God of my heart, and the God that is my portion for ever' (Ps. lxxii. 26).
? 15. What means 'God is omnipresent'?
God is omnipresent means that He is everywhere: in Heaven, on earth, and in all places.
'Do not I fill Heaven and earth? saith the Lord' (Jer. xxiii. 24). 'God is not far from every one of us; for in Him we live, and move, and are' (Acts xvii. 27, 28). Although God fills all space, nevertheless He is everywhere entire and perfect, and encompassed by no space; for He is immense.
? 16. What means 'God is all-knowing'?
God is all-knowing means that He knows all things perfectly and from all eternity; He knows all things past, present, and to come, even our most secret thoughts.
' The eyes of the Lord are far brighter than the sun, beholding round about all the ways of men, and the bottom of the deep, and looking into the hearts of men, into the most hidden parts; for all things were known to the Lord God before they were created: so also after they were perfected He beholdeth all things' (Ecclus. xxiii. 28, 29). See the whole Psalm cxxxviii. — Examples: Predictions of Christ and of the Prophets.
? 17. What benefit do we derive from the frequent remembrance of God's omnipresence and omniscience?
1. It keeps us everywhere, even in secret, from evil, and incites us to good; and 2. It gives us courage and consolation in all difficulties and troubles.
1. 'It is better for me to fall into your hands without doing it, than to sin in the sight of the Lord' (Dan. xiii. 23), 'That thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret will repay thee' (Matt. vi. 4). 2. 'Though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evils, for Thou art with me' (Ps. xxii. 4). 'Behold my witness is in Heaven, and He that knoweth my conscience is on high' (Job xvi. 20).
? 18. What means 'God is all-wise'?
God is all-wise means that He knows how to dispose all things in the best manner, in order to attain His end.
'How great are Thy works, O Lord! Thou hast made all things in wisdom' (Ps. ciii. 24), — Examples: The child Moses saved; Joseph exalted; Aman disgraced.
? 19. What means 'God is all-powerful or almighty'?
God is all-powerful means that He can do anything, and has only to will, and the thing is done.
'Whatsoever the Lord pleased He hath done, in Heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all the deeps' (Ps. cxxxiv. 6.). 'Because no word shall be impossible with God' (Luke i. 37). — Examples: The Creation; the wonders in Egypt and in the desert.
? 20. To what should our belief in God's infinite power and infinite wisdom incite us?
It should incite us, 1. To place all our confidence in God; and 2. To be always resigned to His dispensations,
1. 'Put not your trust in the children of men, in whom there is no salvation. Blessed is he whose hope is in the Lord his God' (Ps. cxlv. 2, 5). — Example: Gedeon. 2. 'Commit thy way to the Lord and trust in Him and He will do it' (Ps. xxxvi. 5). — Example: Job.
? 21. What means 'God is holy'?
God is holy means that He loves and wills only what is good—i.e., what is in accord with His perfections — and that he abhors all that is evil.
'Thou hast loved justice, and hated iniquity' (Ps. xliv. 8). — Example: The giving of the Law on Mount Sinai.
? 22. What means 'God is just'?
God is just means that He rewards and punishes men according to their deserts.
'He will render to every man according to his works: . . . for there is no respect of person with God' (Rom. ii. 6, 11). Examples: The world punished by the deluge and Sodom and Gomorrha destroyed by fire from heaven; but Noe and Lot preserved.
? 23. When will perfect retribution be made?
Perfect retribution will not be made until the soul is in the other world;1 there is, however, even in this life, no true happiness for the wicked,2 and no true unhappiness for the just.3
1 Parable of the cockle and the wheat (Matt. xiii. 30); of the rich man and Lazarus (Luke xvi.). - 2 'We wearied ourselves in the way of iniquity and destruction, and have walked through hard ways' (Wisd. v. 7). — Examples: Cain, Absalom, Achab, Antiochus. 3 'The souls of the just are in the hand of God' (Wisd. iii. 1). — Examples: Joseph, Tobias, Susanna, Daniel, St. Paul (2 Cor. vii. 4).
? 24. To what should the remembrance of God's holiness and justness animate us?
It should animate us, 1. Carefully to avoid all evil, and to become more and more holy; and 2. Not to pride ourselves in our pretended righteousness.
1. 'Fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear Him that can destroy both soul and body into hell' (Matt. x. 28). 'I am the Lord your God: be holy, because I am holy' (Levit. xi. 44). 2. 'I am not conscious to myself of anything, yet I am not hereby justified; but He that judgeth me is the Lord' (1 Cor. iv, 4).
? 25. What means 'God is good'?
God is good means that out of love He will do good to all creatures, and that He really bestows innumerable blessings upon us.
'Thou lovest all things that are, and hatest none of the things which Thou hast made' (Wisd. xi. 25). 'Thus saith the Lord: Can a woman forget her infant, so as not to have pity on the son of her womb? And if she should forget, yet will not I forget thee' (Isai. xlix. 15).
? 26. Which is the greatest proof of God's love and goodness?
That He delivered His own Son up to death for the salvation of us sinners.
'God is charity. By this hath the charity of God appeared towards us, because God hath sent His Only-begotten Son into the world, that we may live by Him' (1 John iv. 8, 9).
? 27. What means 'God is merciful'?
God is merciful means that He is disposed to avert all evil from His creatures, and therefore willingly pardons all truly penitent sinners.
'The mercy of God is upon all flesh' (Ecclus. xviii. 12. Comp. Jon. iv. 11). 'As I live, saith the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live' (Ez. xxxiii. 11). — Ex.: The Ninivates; Parable of the prodigal son (Luke xv.).
? 28. What means 'God is long-suffering'?
God is long-suffering means that He often waits a long time before He punishes the sinner, in order to give him time for repentance.
' Thou overlookest the sins of men for the sake of repentance ' (Wisd. xi. 24). — Examples: Manasses (2 Paral. xxxiii); Jerusalem (Matt, xxiii. 37); Parable of the barren fig-tree (Luke xiii.).
? 29. What should we do, since God is so good, so merciful, and so long-suffering?
We should, 1. Be thankful to God, and love Him with all our heart; 2. When we have sinned, we should with confidence beg pardon of Him; and 3. We should be good and merciful to our neighbors.
1. 'Give glory to the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy endureth for ever' (Ps. cvi. 1). — Examples: Ingratitude of the Israelites in the desert punished. 2. 'I will arise and will go to my father' (Luke xv. 18). 3. 'Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful' (Luke vi. 36). Parable of the unmerciful servant (Matt, xviii).
? 30. What means 'God is true'?
God is true means that He can neither err nor lie, and can reveal nothing but truth.
'It is impossible for God to lie' (Hebr. vi. 18).
? 31. What means 'God is faithful'?
God is faithful means that He surely keeps His promises, and executes what He threatens.
'And thou shalt know the Lord thy God. He is a strong and faithful God, keeping His covenant and mercy to them that love Him, and repaying forthwith them that hate Him, so as to destroy them' (Deut. vii. 9, 10).
? 32. What does the truth and faithfulness of God oblige us to do?
1. To believe most firmly in the Word of God, and steadfastly to trust in His promise; and 2. Always to speak the truth, and to keep the promise we have made.
1. 'Blessed are they that have not seen, and have believed' (John XX. 29). — Examples: Abraham. , 2. Punishment of Ananias and Saphira (Acts v.).
Application. 'My son, give me thy heart' (Prov. xxiii. 26). Oh! give it to Him, the Eternal, the Infinitely Perfect, Rich, Good, and Faithful God, without delay, for ever and ever. God alone has a right to possess it, and He alone has the power to render it happy through all eternity.
§ 2. On the Three Divine Persons.
'I believe in God the Father.'
33. Why do we say, 'I believe in God the "Father"'? '
1. Because God is our invisible Father in Heaven; and 2. Because in God there is more than one Person, the first of whom is called the Father.
34. How many Persons are, then, in God? '
There are three Persons in God: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
'Going therefore, teach ye all nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost' (Matt, xxviii. 19). 'There are three who give testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One' (1 John v. 7).
? 35. Is each one of the three Persons God?
Yes, the Father is true God, the Son is true God, and the Holy Ghost is true God.
? 36. Why are the three Persons but one God?
Because all three Persons have one and the same indivisible nature and substance.
? 37. Is any one of these Persons older, or more powerful, than the others?
No; all three Persons are from eternity; all three are equally powerful, good and perfect; because all three are but one God.
? 38. Is there, then, no distinction at all between the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost?
As to the Persons they are distinct; but as to the substance they are one.
? 39. How are the three Divine Persons distinct from one another?
By this: that the Father is begotten of no one, nor proceeds from any one; the Son is begotten of the Father; and the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son.
? 40. But if the Son is begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from both, why, then, is none of the Divine Persons older than the others?
Because the Son is begotten from all eternity, and the Holy Ghost also proceeds from all eternity.
? 41. Why is the Father called the 'first,' the Son the 'second,' and the Holy Ghost the 'third' Person?
They are so called, not to show any superiority, but the order in which the one proceeds from the other from all eternity.
? 42. What works are principally attributed to each of the three Divine Persons?
1. To the Father are attributed the works of omnipotence, and particularly the Creation; 2. To the Son, the works of wisdom, and particularly the Redemption; and 3. To the Holy Ghost, the works of love, and particularly Sanctification; although these works are common to all three Persons.
The works of Omnipotence and Creation are particularly attributed to the Father, because He is the principle to which the two other Persons owe their eternal origin. The works of Wisdom to the Son, because the Father begets the Son by the knowledge of Himself, wherefore the Son is also called the essential 'Image,' the eternal 'Word' of the Father.
The works of Love are attributed to the Holy Ghost, because He proceeds from the mutual love of the Father and of the Son.
? 43. What do we call the mystery of one God in three Persons?
We call it the mystery of the Most Blessed Trinity.
? 44. Can we comprehend this mystery?
No; it is impossible that our weak and limited intellect, which cannot understand even created things except imperfectly, should understand a mystery which is infinitely above all created things.
'Great art Thou in counsel, and incomprehensible in thought' (Jer. xxxii. 19). 'For we know in part. We see now through a glass in a dark manner' (1 Cor. xiii. 9, 12). However incomprehensible this mystery may be, yet it does not contradict any of the truths acknowledged by reason; for we do not say that God has one nature and three natures, but that, though He has but one nature, yet there are three Persons in Him. The Unity refers to the nature, and the Trinity to the Persons, (Comparison with the soul, which has memory, will, and understanding.)
? 45. Is the doctrine of the Most Holy Trinity also important to us?
Yes, it is most important; for it is the principal and fundamental doctrine of Christianity, insomuch that to reject it would be to deny the Christian Faith.
Application. That the grace of this saving Faith may not be withdrawn from you, never forget what thanks you owe to the Most Blessed Trinity for the inestimable benefits of your creation, redemption, and sanctification and what you have solemnly promised to the same Trinity in the holy Sacrament of Baptism. (Feast of the Blessed Trinity.)
§ 3. On the Creation and Government of the World.
'Creator of Heaven and earth.'
? 46. Why is God called 'Creator of Heaven and earth'?
Because God created—i.e., made out of nothing—the whole world, the heavens and the earth, and all that is in them.
? 47. How has God created the whole world?
By His almighty will.
'Thou hast created all things; and for Thy will they were and have been created' (Apoc. iv. 11).
? 48. Did God create the world because He needed it?
No; God is infinitely rich and happy in Himself, and: needs nothing besides Himself.
'Thou art my God, for Thou hast no need of my goods' (Ps. XV. 2).
? 49. If God needs nothing besides Himself, why did He create other beings?
He created them because He is infinitely good, and desired to impart His goodness also to other beings.
'We are, because God is good' (St. Augustine). 'God was not impelled to create by any other cause than a desire to communicate to creatures the riches of His bounty' (Cat. of the Counc. of Trent).
? 50. Did, then, God create the world for His creatures?
No; God created the world for Himself — that is, for His glory — but, nevertheless, for the good of His creatures.
'The Lord hath made all things for Himself (Prov. lxxvi. 4). 'And every one that calleth upon my name, I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, and made him' (Isai. xliii. 7).
? 51. What does God still do, that the world which He has created may not return into its original nothing?
He preserves and governs it.
? 52. How does God preserve the world?
By the same power of His will with which He created the world He causes it also to continue, in the manner He pleases, and as long as He pleases.
'How could anything endure, if Thou wouldst not?' (Wisd. xi. 26.).
? 53. How does God govern the world?
He takes care of all things,1 orders all things, and, in His wisdom and goodness, directs all things to the end for which He has created the world.2
1 'God made the little and the great, and He hath equally care of all' (Wisd. vi. 8). 2 'But the very hairs of your head are all numbered' (Matt. x. 30). 'She [the wisdom of God] reacheth therefore from end to end mightily, and ordereth all things sweetly' (Wisd. viii. 1). — Example: Deliverance of the Jews through Esther.
? 54. What do we call this supreme care of God in preserving and governing the world?
His Divine Providence.
? 55. But if God orders and directs all things in the world, why, then, is there so much evil done? Does He will it?
No, God wills not the evil; but He permits it, 1. Because He has created man free; and 2. Because He knows also how to turn evil into good.
Examples: The history of Joseph in Egypt: ' You thought evil against me; but God turned it into good' (Gen. 1, 20). Thus God, the Almighty, turned even the murder of our Saviour by the Jews to the salvation of the world, and the impenitence of the same Jews to the conversion of the heathens. And thus He still avails Himself every day of the designs of the wicked in order to glorify His Church; 'for there is no wisdom, there is no prudence, there is no counsel against the Lord' (Prov. xxi. 30).
? 56. And if God takes care of all things, why are we subject to so many sufferings?
1. That the sinner may acknowledge the chastisement of God and mend his ways, and not perish for ever; and 2. That the just man may be more and more purified, and more abound in merits, and thus obtain a greater reward in Heaven.
1. Examples: The brothers of Joseph: 'We deserve to suffer these things, because we have sinned against our brother' (Gen. xlii. 21), Manasses (2 Paral. xxxiii.); Jonas (Jonas ii.). 2. 'Gold and silver are tried in the fire, but acceptable men in the furnace of humiliation' (Ecclus. ii. 5). 'Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for my sake. Be glad and rejoice, for your reward is very great in Heaven' (Matt. v. 11, 12).
? 57. But why does God often permit the wicked to prosper, whilst evil befalls the good?
1. Because He will not only deter the sinner from his evil ways by punishment, but will also win him by benefits; 2. Because He reserves to Himself to punish the wicked, and to reward the good, especially in eternity; and 3. Because He will not even leave the little good which the wicked may do entirely unrewarded, and, therefore, as He cannot reward it in the next world on account of their impenitence. He will reward it here below.
1. 'What is there that I ought to do more to my vineyard that I have not done to it? Was it that I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it hath brought forth wild grapes?' (Isai. V. 4). 2. 'The Lord patiently expecteth, that when the day of judgment shall come, He may punish them in the fulness of their sins' (2 Mach, vi. 14). 3. 'Woe to you that are rich; for you have your consolation; that is, your reward here in this world' (Luke vi. 24). — Example: Achab: 'Because Achab hath humbled himself for my sake, I will not bring the evil in his days' (3 Kings xxi. 29).
? 58. How ought we to receive the sufferings that come upon us?
We ought to receive them as graces of God; for 'whom the Lord loveth He chastiseth'1 (Hebr. xii. 6); and 'before he be glorified, it [his heart] is humbled' (Prov. xviii. 12).
1'For it is a token of great goodness when sinners are not suffered to go on in their ways for a long time, but are presently punished' (2 Mach. vii. 13).
Application. ' Cast all your care upon the Lord, for He hath care of you' (1 Pet. v. 7). 'Behold the birds of the air, for they neither sow, nor do they reap, nor gather into barns, and your Heavenly Father feedeth them. Consider the lilies of the field,' etc. (Matt. vi. 26-33). Take willingly everything that is disagreeable to you as coming from the hand of God: 'As it hath pleased the Lord, so is it done; blessed be the name of the Lord ' (Job i. 21); and never be so rash as to complain of the dispensations of God. Whatever may come, ' To them that love God, all things work together unto good ' (Rom. viii. 28.).
§ 4. On the Angels.
? 59. Has God created nothing else but the visible world?
God has also created an invisible world — namely innumerable spirits called Angels (Dan. vii. 10).
The Angels are divided into nine different Orders or Choirs — namely, Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Principalities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim, and Seraphim (Col. i. 16; Eph. i. 21; Ezech. x.; Isai. vi. 2).
? 60. In what state were the Angels when God had created them?
They were all good and happy, and endowed with excellent gifts.
? 61. Did the Angels all remain good and happy?
No, many rebelled against God; therefore they were cast away from Him for ever, and hurled into hell.
' God spared not the Angels that sinned, but delivered them, drawn down by infernal ropes to the lower hell, unto torments' (2 Pet. ii. 4; comp. Jude vi.).
? 62. How has God rewarded the Angels that remained faithful?
He has rewarded them with eternal happiness, which consists in seeing and possessing Him everlastingly.
'Their Angels in Heaven always see the face of my Father who is in Heaven' (Matt, xviii. 10).
? 63. How are the good Angels affected towards us?
The good Angels love us; therefore they protect us in soul and body, pray for us, and exhort us to do good.
'He hath given His Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways' (Ps. xc. 11). — Examples: Agar, Lot, Tobias, Judas Machabeus (2 Mach. x. 29, 30); Peter in prison; Cornelius the centurion.
? 64. How do we call those Angels who are particularly given to man for his protection?
Guardian Angels.
? 65. What is our duty towards our Guardian Angels?
We must venerate them with great devotion, be thankful to them, and readily follow their admonitions.
'Behold I will send my Angel, who shall go before thee, Take notice of him, and hear his voice, and do not think him one to be contemned' (Exod. xxiii. 20, 21).
? 66. How are the fallen or wicked Angels affected towards us?
The wicked Angels, through hatred and envy, lay snares for us, in order to injure us in soul and body, and, by enticing us to sin, to plunge us into eternal perdition.
'Your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, goeth about seeking whom he may devour' (1 Pet. v. 8). — Examples: Eve, Job, Sara, the demoniacs, Judas. See also Luke viii. 12, and Apoc. xii.
? 67. Why does God permit the wicked Angels to lay snares for us?
He permits it because He knows how to make their snares serve unto His own honor and to the salvation of men.
'And they talked among themselves, saying: "What word is this, for with authority and power He [Jesus] commandeth the unclean spirits, and they go out? And the fame of Him was published into every place of the country' (Luke iv. 36, 37). 'And the people with one accord were attentive to those things which were said by Philip, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. For many of them had unclean spirits, who, crying with a loud voice, went out' (Acts viii. 6, 7).
? 68. What must we do on our part, in order that the snares of the wicked Angels may serve to our salvation?
We must fight against them full of faith and confidence, making use at the same time of the arms of prayer, and availing ourselves of the blessings sanctioned by the Church; and we must firmly resist all temptationsto evil.
'For our wrestling is not [only] against flesh and blood; but against the spirits of wickedness in the high places, i. e., in the air' (Eph. vi. 12). 'In all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may be able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the most wicked one' (Eph. vi. 16). 'Resist the devil, and he will fly from you' (James iv. 7). — Example: Tobias and Sara (Tob. vi. 16-19, and viii. 4-10).
Application. Beware of being like the evil spirits by sinning, or of being even their accomplice in seducing others to sin. Imitate the good Angels; be innocent, docile, pious, devout, and always ready to promote the welfare of your neighbor. Daily venerate your Guardian Angel, and recommend yourself to him in all dangers of soul and body. (Feast of the Holy Guardian Angels.)
§ 5. Man and his Fall.
(See Short History of Revealed Religion, 1, 2.)
? 69. How did God make the first man, Adam?
God formed a body of the slime of the earth, and breathed an immortal soul into it; and the first man was made (Gen. ii. 7).
? 70. How did God distinguish man at his creation from all other creatures?
By creating him to His own image (Gen. i. 27).
? 71. How was the first man the image of God?
By this: that he was endowed with natural and supernatural gifts, which made him resemble God.
? 72. In what do the 'natural' gifts consist?
Especially in this: that the human soul is an immortal spirit, endowed with understanding and free will.
? 73. In what do the 'supernatural ' gifts consist?
Especially in this: 1. That the first man possessed sanctifying grace, and together with it the sonship of God, and the right of inheriting the kingdom of Heaven; 2. That in him the senses never rebelled against reason; and 3. That he was never to be subjected to hardships and sufferings, nor to death.
? 74. Why are the latter called supernatural gifts?
They are called supernatural gifts because they do not belong to our nature, but are extraordinary and free gifts of God.
? 75. Did our first parents receive this Divine free gift for themselves alone?
They received it also for all their descendants; and therefore, according to God's dispensation, not only their natural, but also their supernatural gifts were to descend to the whole human race.
? 76. On what condition did they receive these supernatural gifts for themselves and their descendants?
On condition that they should remain faithful and obedient to God (Gen. ii. 17).
? 77. Did our first parents observe this condition?
No; they fell into sin (Gen. iii. 6).
? 78. What was the sin of Adam?
The sin of Adam was a sin of pride and grave disobedience.
? 79. Was this transgression a grievous sin?
Yes, it was a very grievous sin; for though they were filled with the knowledge of God, yet they believed the serpent (which is the devil, Apoc. xx. 2) more than God, rebelled against Him, and wanted to be like God (Gen. iii.).
? 80. What punishment came upon Adam and Eve?
1. They forfeited all their supernatural gifts, and at the same time were also weakened in the faculties of their souls; 2. They were expelled from Paradise, in which God had placed them; and 3. They became liable to eternal damnation.
? 81. Did our first parents lose these supernatural gifts for themselves only?
No; as by their obedience they would have preserved them not only for themselves, but for all their descendants, so by their disobedience they lost them not only for themselves, but also for us all, and have thereby plunged the whole human race into the greatest misery.
? 82. In what does the misery consist into which out first parents have plunged the whole human race?
In this: that sin, with its fatal consequences, has passed from Adam to all mankind, insomuch that we now all come into this world infected with sin.
'By one man sin entered into this world, and by sin death; and so death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned' (Rom, V. 12). 'Behold, I was conceived in iniquities; and in sins did my mother conceive me' (Ps. i. 7). The Blessed Virgin. Mary alone was, by a particular grace and privilege, perfectly preserved, through the merits of Jesus Christ, not only from all actual sin, but also from every stain of original sin. This privilege is called the Immaculate Conception which was defined as a dogma of faith by Pope Pius IX 8 December 1854. The modern devotion to the Miraculous Shrine at Lourdes is closely associated with this doctrine. By decree of the First Council of Baltimore in 1846 the Immaculate Conception was chosen as the Patronal Feast of the United States.
? 83. What do we call this sin in which we are all born?
We call it Original Sin, because we have not actually committed it, but have inherited it from our first parents, who were the origin or source of all mankind.
? 84. Is original sin, though not actually committed by us, nevertheless truly sin?
Yes, it is the death of the soul — it is truly and properly sin (Counc. of Trent, Sess. V.).
Owing to the sin of Adam, the entire human race lost its original sanctity and righteousness — i.e., sanctifying grace — and all the supernatural gifts which were intended for it. 'We all were by nature children of wrath,' because we were dead in sin' (Eph. ii. 3).
? 85. What fatal consequences have, with original sin, passed to all men?
1. Their disgrace with God, and at the same time their loss of the sonship of God, and of the right of inheriting the kingdom of Heaven; 2. Ignorance, concupiscence, and proneness to evil; and 3. All sorts of hardships, pains, calamities, and at last death.
1. See Eph. ii. 3. 'Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God' (John iii. 5). 2. 'I see another law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind' (Rom. vii. 23). 'The imagination and thought of man's heart are prone to evil from his youth' (Gen. viii. 21). 3. 'Great labor is created for all men, and a heavy yoke is upon the children of Adam, from the day of their birth until the day of their burial' (Ecclus. xl. 1). 'God created man incorruptible; but by the envy of the devil death came into the world' (Wisd. ii. 23, 27). This doctrine of Divine revelation is confirmed by experience, and by the sad history of mankind (comp. Rom. vii. 18-24).
? 86. Did the fatal consequences of sin fall upon man only?
The punishment of God was also inflicted upon the earth, which had been created for man.
'Cursed is the earth in thy work,' said God to Adam; 'with labor and toil shalt thou eat thereof all the days of thy life. Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee' (Gen. iii. 17, 18).
? 87. What would have become of man, if God had not shown him mercy?
No one could have received grace and been saved.
? 88. Why could no one have any more received grace?
Because the Divine justice demanded a satisfaction adequate to the sin; and no creature, but least of all man, who had fallen so deeply, was able to give such satisfaction.
? 89. How did God show mercy to man?
He promised him a Saviour, who, by a full satisfaction, should take sin away from him, and regain for him grace and the right of inheriting the kingdom of Heaven (Gen. iii. 15).
'Therefore, as by the offence of one [Adam] judgment came unto all men to condemnation; so also by the justice of one [Christ] grace came unto all men to justification of life; . . . that as sin hath reigned to death, so also grace might reign by justice unto life everlasting' (Rom. v. 18, 21).
? 90. If without the grace of the Redeemer no one can be saved, how then could those who lived before the coming of Christ go to Heaven?
Those who lived before the coming of the Redeemer of the world could not indeed enter Heaven before Him; but with the grace which God gave them on account of the Redeemer to come, they could merit the kingdom of Heaven, and then enter into it with Him.
The whole of the Old Testament bears witness of the many eminent graces which God gave to the Israelites, and to the just who lived under the Patriarchal law. (Short Hist, of Revealed Rel., 6-19).
? 91. Did God give grace also to the pagans for the salvation of their souls?
Yes; He manifested Himself also to the pagans, and in many ways exhorted them to repentance and amendment:
1. By the voice of conscience; 2. By natural benefits; 3. By His judgments; 4. By extraordinary men whom He raised among them or sent to them; 5. By the Israelites whom, with their holy books. He dispersed among them; and 6. Sometimes also by Angels, dreams, wonderful apparitions or events.
1. 'Who [the Gentiles] show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness to them' (Rom. ii, 15). 2. 'He left not Himself without testimony, doing good from Heaven, giving rains and fruitful seasons,' etc. (Acts xiv, 16). 3. Deluge; punishment of Sodom, of Egypt, of Chanaan, and of other places (compare Wisd. xii. and xvi-xviii.). 4. Job, Balaam, Jonas, Daniel, etc. 5, 'He hath therefore scattered you [Israelites] among the Gentiles, who know not Him, that you may declare His wonderful works, and make them known that there is no other almighty God besides Him' (Tob. xiii. 4). 6. Cornelius, the centurion, was advised by an Angel (Acts X. 3); Nabuchodonosor, by dreams (Dan. ii. 4); Baltassar, by a mysterious hand (Dan. v.); Balaam, by an ass (Num. xxii. 22, 28-30).
? 92. Did the Redeemer come immediately after the fall of our first parents?
No; a long period elapsed: and meanwhile mankind learned by experience into what great misery sin had plunged them, and that no one but God could save them.
Application. My child, be a beautiful image of God and hate sin, which has brought all evils into the world. 'Sin maketh nations miserable' (Prov. xiv. 34).
