Part I: Faith · The Creed: Third Article
The Third Article.
'Who was conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. '
(See Short Hist, of Revealed Rel., 21, 22, 23.)
? 1. What does the Third Article of the Creed principally teach us?
It teaches us that the Son of God, the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, became man through the operation of the Holy Ghost, was born of the Virgin Mary, and is called our Lord Jesus Christ.
'The Word [the Only-begotten of the Father] was made flesh, and dwelt among us' (John i. 14).
? 2. What do we call this Mystery?
The Incarnation of the Son of God.
? 3. What is, then, our belief concerning Jesus Christ, when we believe the Mystery of the Incarnation?
We believe that Jesus Christ is both true God and true man, or that He is a God-Man: He is God from eternity, and became man in time.
When Christ says, 'I and the Father are one,' He speaks of Himself as God; and when He says, 'The Father is greater than I, ' He speaks of Himself as Man.
? 4. What do we mean by saying Jesus Christ is also true man?
We mean that He had a human body and a human soul; that He could feel and suffer as we can; and that He was like to us in all things except in sin.
? 5. How many natures, then, are there in Jesus Christ?
There are two natures in Jesus Christ, the Divine and the human.
? 6. Are there also in Jesus Christ two wills distinct from one another?
Yes, in Jesus Christ there is a Divine will and a human will, which, however, is always in perfect subjection to the Divine will.
'Father, not my will, but Thine be done' (Luke xxii. 42).
? 7. Are there also two persons in Jesus Christ?
No, Jesus Christ is only one Divine Person; for the two natures are inseparably united in the one Person of the Son of God.
? 8. Why is the Incarnation of the Son of God attributed to the operation of the Holy Ghost?
Because it is especially an effect of the Divine love and mercy towards man.
'God so loved the world as to give His Only-begotten Son' (John iii. 16).
? 9. From whom did the Son of God take His human nature?
From Mary, the purest of Virgins; therefore she is also called 'Mother of God.' (Feast of the Annunciation of B. V. Mary.)
? 10. Why is Mary called 'the purest of Virgins'?
Because she always remained a Virgin incomparably pure and entirely undefiled, not only before but also at and after the birth of the Divine Child.
'Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and His name shall be called Emmanuel, that is, God with us' (Isai. vii. 14). In the Holy Scriptures near relations are often called brethren; as Lot and Abraham. In like manner the cousins of Jesus are called His brethren (Matt. xii. 46).
? 11. Why is Mary called 'Mother of God,' since Christ took only His 'human' nature from her?
She is justly so called because Christ, who was born of her according to the flesh, is true God.
'The Holy One which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God ' (Luke i. 35). The doctrine of Nestorius, that Mary is not to be called the Mother of God, was condemned as heretical by the General Council of Ephesus in 431.
? 12. Do we believe that, therefore, Mary is equal to God?
No; Mary is a creature and therefore infinitely below God.
? 13. Had Jesus Christ also an earthly father?
As Man, Jesus Christ had no father; for Joseph, the virgin-spouse of Mary, was only His foster father.
'Jesus being [as it was supposed] the Son of Joseph' (Luke iii. 23).
? 14. Why did the Son of God become man?
1. That He might be able to suffer and die for us; for as God He could neither suffer nor die; and 2. That by the example of His life, as well as by His word, He might teach us virtue and holiness.
? 15. What virtues does Jesus teach us by His example?
All virtues in the highest degree, especially zeal for the honor of God1, and for the salvation of men;2 meekness,3 humility,4 patience,5 kindness and mercy towards every one,6 even our greatest enemies;7 and obedience to His Heavenly Father unto death.8
1 Chastisement of the profaners of the Temple. 2 Jesus the good shepherd. 3 Reprimand of the Apostles who were going to call fire from Heaven. 4 Washing of the feet of the Apostles. 5 His Passion. 6 Jesus, the merciful Samaritan; Jesus at the well of Jacob; in the house of Zacheus, etc. 7 'Friend, whereto art thou come?' 'Father, forgive them.' 8 'Father, not my will, but Thine be done.'
? 16. What example does Jesus give in particular to young people?
He teaches them, by His example, readily to obey, to take delight in prayer and instruction, to love to stay in the house of God, and to advance in wisdom and grace as they do in age.
The Child Jesus in the Temple and at Nazareth.
? 17. Why did Jesus Christ make choice of a poor and humble life?
1. That He might suffer for us from the very beginning of His life; and 2. To teach us that we ought not to love and seek the vain goods of this world.
Application. Give thanks to God with your whole heart for having taken the form of a servant, and become a poor child for the love of you; especially when you hear the Angelus-bell ring in the morning, at noon, and at night. Resolve also to perform all your actions in the manner you know Jesus did His. If you do this, you will be sure to please God, whether you be rich or poor. (Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, or Christmas day.)
