Part I: Faith · The Creed: Eighth Article
The Eighth Article.
'I believe in the Holy Ghost.'
(See Short Hist, of Revealed Religion, 28.)
? 1. By whom is the fruit or grace of the Divine Redemption communicated to us?
By the Holy Ghost.
? 2. Where is this grace communicated to us?
It is communicated to us in the Catholic Church, to which Christ has, for that very purpose, promised and sent the Holy Ghost.
? 3. Who is the Holy Ghost?
The Holy Ghost is the Third Person of the Blessed Trinity, true God with the Father and the Son.
Thus the Holy Scripture teaches. 1. It calls the Holy Ghost God, one with the Father and the Son: 'Why hath Satan tempted thy heart, that thou shouldst lie to the Holy Ghost? Thou hast not lied to men, but to God' (Acts v. 3, 4). 'The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one' (1 John v. 7). It attributes Divine Perfections to Him—Omnipotence, Omnipresence, Omniscience, Eternity, etc. (1 Cor. xii. 8-11; Ps. cxxxviii. 7-10; and 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11, etc.). It attributes Divine Works to Him — the Creation, Regeneration, Sanctification, the Communication of all spiritual gifts, etc. (Ps. ciii. 30; John iii. 5; 1 Cor. vi. 11; Rom. v. 5; Acts ii. 4. 17, etc.).
2. It represens the Holy Ghost as a Person distinct from the Father and from the Son: 'I will ask the Father, and He shall give you another Paraclete, that He may abide with you for ever, the Spirit of Truth' (John xiv. 16, 17). 'The Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, as a dove, upon Him; and a voice came from Heaven: Thou art my beloved Son' (Luke iii. 22, and elsewhere).
Thus also the Catholic Church teaches, and has always taught. As early as in the General Council of Constantinople (A.D., 381) she unanimously condemned the heresy of Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and she expressly declared 'that the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of life, is adored and glorified together with the Father and the Son.'
? 4. From whom does the Holy Ghost proceed?
The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, as from one source.
'I will send you the Spirit of Truth, who proceedeth from the Father'; 'He shall receive of mine' (John xv. 26, and xvi. 15).
? 5. Why is the 'Third' Person of the Blessed Trinity in particular named the 'Holy Spirit,' since the name of 'Spirit' and 'Holy' equally belongs to the 'First' and to the 'Second' Person?
The Third Person is in particular called the 'Holy Spirit,' because to Him is especially ascribed the work of our sanctification, and He imparts to us the spiritual life of grace.
Hence the Third Person is also called the 'Sanctifier' and 'Giver of Life.'
? 6. Why is the work of our sanctification especially ascribed to the Holy Ghost?
Because He, as the Spirit of Love, is the Giver of all inward holiness, and the Dispenser of all supernatural gifts and graces, whereby we are sanctified.
It is true, the work of our sanctification is common to all the three Divine Persons; nevertheless, as a work of love it has a special relation to the Holy Ghost—the Spirit of Love.
? 7. But is it not Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, who sanctifies us?
Jesus Christ sanctifies us, inasmuch as He has merited and prepared for us the grace which makes us pleasing to God; but the Holy Ghost is said especially to sanctify us, inasmuch as He, through the merits of Christ, actually cleanses us from sin, and makes us just and pleasing to God.
'You are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God' (1 Cor. vi. 11).
? 8. How does the Holy Ghost sanctify us?
He sanctifies us by means of the supernatural grace which He ordinarily infuses into our souls through the Sacraments.
? 9. What are in particular the gifts of the Holy Ghost?
These seven: 1. Wisdom; 2. Understanding; 3. Counsel; 4. Fortitude; 5. Knowledge; 6. Godliness or Piety; and 7. The Fear of the Lord (Isai. xi. 2, 3).
? 10. When did Christ send down the Holy Ghost upon His Church?
Christ sent down the Holy Ghost in a visible manner upon her on Whit-Sunday, when he descended upon the Apostles in the form of fiery tongues.
? 11. For what purpose was the Holy Ghost sent upon the Church?
That he might perpetually teach her, sanctify her, and direct her in an invisible manner; and, in general, that He might impart to her those abundant graces which Christ has merited for her.
By virtue of the Holy Ghost, the Church teaches (John xiv. 26), cleanses from sin, and sanctifies (John xx. 22, etc.), guides, and rules (Acts xx. 28, and xv. 28).
? 12. Is the Holy Ghost still sent at the present time?
He is still sent at the present time in an invisible manner, as often as He enters with His sanctifying grace into our souls in, order to dwell there.
'Know you not, that you are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?' (1 Cor. iii. 16).
? 13. How long does the Holy Ghost remain in the soul?
As long as the soul is free from all grievous sin.
? 14. Does sin, then, drive the Holy Ghost from the soul?
Yes, mortal sin drives away the Holy Ghost, and profanes the temple of God.
'But if any man violate the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which you are' (1 Cor. iii. 17).
? 15. But is not the Holy Ghost everywhere?
As God He is everywhere; but as the Author and Dispenser of grace, He is especially with the Catholic Church, and in the souls of the just.
Application. Strive most earnestly, by avoiding sin, to preserve the Holy Ghost in your heart, and to correspond faithfully with His inspirations. 'Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins; for the Holy Spirit will flee from the deceitful' (Wisd. i. 4, 5).
