Part I: Faith · The Creed: Eleventh Article
The Eleventh Article.
'The Resurrection of the Body.'
? 1. What happens to man at his death?
The soul separates from the body, and appears before the judgment-seat of God; but the body returns into the earth (Eccles. xii. 7).
? 2. Why must all men die?
Because all have sinned in Adam.
'By one man sin entered into this world, and by sin death' (Rom. V. 12).
? 3. Why has God hidden from us the time of our death?
1. That we may so much the more honor and fear Him as the Supreme Lord of life and death; 2. That we may keep ourselves every moment prepared for death;1 and 3. That the dread with which we are seized when we think of death as at hand may be moderated.
1'Be you then also ready; for at what hour you think not, the Son of Man will come' (Luke xii. 40). Parable of the Ten Virgins (Matt. xxv.).
? 4. How are we to keep ourselves prepared for death?
We should carefully avoid sin, and lead a godly life.
? 5. How long will the body remain in the earth?
The body will remain in the earth till the day of judgment, when God will raise it again to life, and reunite it for ever to the soul, from which death had separated it.
'The hour cometh, wherein all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God. And they that have done good things shall come forth unto the resurrection of life; but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment' — i.e., to hear the sentence of condemnation (John v. 28, 29),
? 6. What do we call this raising of the bodies to life?
The resurrection of the flesh or body.
? 7. But how can the bodies, when reduced to dust, rise again?
By the Omnipotence of God, our bodies, reduced to dust, can as easily be raised again to life as they were once made out of nothing.
Parable of the grain of wheat (1 Cor. xv. 35, etc.).
? 8. Why shall our bodies rise again?
1. That, as the body was a partner with the soul in the performance, of good or evil works, so it may also be a partaker of the reward or punishment (2 Cor. v. 10); and 2. That the victory of Christ over death may be perfect.
'When this mortal hath put on immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that is written, "Death is swallowed up in victory; O death, where is thy victory?" ' (1 Cor. xv. 54, 55).
? 9. Shall all men rise from the dead?
Yes, all men, the good as well as the wicked ( John v. 28, 29).
? 10. Will the bodies, when raised to life, be all alike?
No; the bodies of the bad shall be hideous and miserable, but those of the good shall be glorious, and like to the glorified Body of Christ.
'We shall all indeed rise again, but we shall not all be changed'—i.e., glorified (1 Cor. xv. 51). 'Our Lord Jesus Christ will reform the body of our lowness, that it may be made like to the body of His glory' (Phil. iii. 21). Hence the honor we pay to the bodies of the deceased (Funerals; blessed Burying-grounds) .
According to 1 Cor. xv. 42-44, we distinguish four qualities of the glorified bodies r 1. 'It [the body] is sown [i.e., buried] in corruption, it shall rise in incorruption,' incorruptible and impassible—i.e., incapable of corruption, and of any suffering. 2. 'It is sown in dishonor, it shall rise in glory,' bright—i.e., shining with glory, without spot or blemish. 3. 'It is sown in weakness, it shall rise in power,' agile—i.e., capable of transporting itself with the soul in an instant from one place to another. 4. It is sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual body,' subtile—i.e., spiritualized, or capable of penetrating any corporeal substance, like our Saviour 's Body after His Resurrection.
? 11. Is cremation, or the burning of the bodies of the dead, lawful?
No: cremation is forbidden by the Church under severe penalties.
? 12. What impression should our belief in the resurrection of the body make upon us?
It should incite us, 1. To honor our body, and never to abuse it by sinning; 2. Patiently to suffer all bodily pains, and even death; and 3. To console ourselves at the death of our friends.
1. 'Glorify and bear God in your body' (1 Cor. vi. 20). 2. Examples: Job xix. 25-27. 'In the last day I shall rise out of the earth, and I shall be clothed again with my skin, and in my flesh I shall see my God. This my hope is laid up in my bosom.' The Machabean Brothers, 2 Mach. vii. 9-14. 3. *We will not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that you may not be sorrowful, even as others who have no hope,' etc. (1 Thess. iv. 12-17).
Application. Never abuse your eyes, tongue, ears, hands, nor your other senses or members by doing evil, but 'yield them to serve justice, unto sanctification ' (Rom. vi. 19); that you may one day rise to everlasting glory, and not to everlasting damnation.
