Part II: The Commandments · Chapter II: The Ten Commandments of God (2 of 4)
'Knowing this first, that in the last days there shall come deceitful scoffers, walking after their own lusts, . . . you, therefore, brethren, knowing these things before, take heed, lest being led aside by the error of the unwise, you fall from your own steadfastness' (2 Pet. iii. 3, 17).
? 5. What is meant by blasphemy?
By blasphemy is meant contemptuous and abusive language uttered against God, the Saints, or holy things.
This sin is so great that, in the Old Law, those who were found guilty of it were put to death. 'He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying let him die; all the multitude shall stone him' (Levit. xxiv. 16). How Sennacherib, King of the Assyrians, was punished for blaspheming the Lord, see 4 Kings xix.
? 6. May we also become guilty of blasphemy by thoughts?
Yes, when we voluntarily think contemptuously of God or of the Saints.
? 7. What is swearing or taking an oath?
Swearing or taking an oath is to call the All-knowing God to witness that we speak the truth, or that we will keep our promise.
We call God also to witness when we swear by Heaven, by the Holy Cross, or by the Gospel, etc. ' Whosoever shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by Him that dwelleth in it; and he that sweareth by Heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by Him that sitteth thereon' (Matt, xxiii. 21, 22).
? 8. Is it ever lawful to take an oath?
Yes; it is lawful and even obligatory when we are called upon to do so by competent authority in the interests of justice, as is the case of witnesses in a legal trial.
? 9. Are we bound to keep a lawful oath?
Yes; it is a grievous sin not to fulfil a lawful oath, if we are able to do so.
? 10. How do we sin by swearing?
We sin by swearing, 1. When we swear falsely or in doubt; 2. When we swear, or induce others to swear, without necessity; 3. When we swear to do what is evil, or to omit what is good.
'Thou shalt swear in truth, and in judgment, and in justice' (Jer. iv. 2).
? 11. What means swearing falsely, or in doubt?
It means, 1. To assert with an oath that something is true, though we know that it is untrue, or do not know whether it is true or not; 3. To promise with an oath something which we do not intend to perform.
? 12. What are we to think of perjury or a false oath?
Perjury, especially in a court of justice, is one of the greatest crimes; because he who commits it, 1. Mocks God's Omniscience, Sanctity, and Justice; 2. Destroys the last means of preserving truth and faith among men; and 3. Almost solemnly renounces God, and calls down His vengeance upon himself.
'And the Lord said to me: This flying volume which thou seest is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the earth; for every one that sweareth shall be judged by it. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it shall come to the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof (Zach, v. 3, 4; comp. Ezech. xvii.).
? 13. When a person has sworn to do something evil, or to omit something that is good, is he bound to keep such an oath?
No; for as it was a sin to take such an oath, so it would be another sin to keep it. — Example: Herod (Mark vi. 23-28).
? 14. What do you mean by cursing?
Cursing means to wish any evil either to ourselves 01 to our neighbor, or to any of God's creatures, whereby the name of God is frequently dishonored.
Cursing is something very hateful, which betrays a rude, angry temper. From the mouth of a Christian or child of God nothing but 'blessing' ought to come forth (1 Pet. iii. 9). Cursing is at the same time an oath, when we call upon God to punish us if we speak an untruth.
? 15. What is a vow?
A vow is a voluntary promise made to God to do something that is agreeable to Him, although there be no obligation to do it.
Accordingly, a vow is: 1. A real promise, by which we deliberately bind ourselves, and not a mere desire or resolution; 2. A promise made to God, because it is to God alone we make vows; and 3. A promise to do something that is agreeable to God; therefore it cannot be anything trifling, sinful, or injurious to others, nor anything good in itself, but by which something better is prevented or higher duties neglected.
? 16. What does the Church teach with regard to vows?
1. That they please God, because they are voluntary offerings made to Him. Thus God kindly accepted the vows of the Patriarch Jacob,1 and of the pious Anna, the mother of Samuel,2 and granted their petitions.
1'And Jacob made a vow, saying: If God shall be with me, and I shall return prosperously to my father's house, of all things that Thou shalt give to me, I will offer tithes to Thee' (Gen. xxviii. 20-22). 2 'Anna made a vow, saying: O Lord of Hosts, if Thou wilt be mindful of me, and wilt give to Thy servant a man-child, I will give him to the Lord all the days of his life' (1 Kings i. 11).
2. That it is a sacred duty to keep them, unless it be impossible to do so. People should therefore be very cautious about making vows, and should, in general, ask advice of their Confessor, or some other prudent Priest.
' If thou hast vowed anything to God, defer not to pay it. It is much better not to vow, than after a vow not to perform the things promised' (Eccles. v. 3, 4).
? 17. If it should become very difficult to keep a vow, in whole or in part, what is to be done?
One's confessor ought to be consulted who may, if necessary, seek a dispensation from the Bishop or the Pope, according to the character of the vow.
? 18. Is it sufficient not to dishonor the name of God?
No; we must also honor and revere it; i.e., we must gratefully praise it, devoutly call upon it, steadily confess it, and exert ourselves to promote its honor.
Application. Carefully avoid the shameful habit of cursing and swearing. 'A man that sweareth much shall be filled with iniquity, and a scourge shall not depart from his house' (Ecclus. xxiii. 12). On the contrary, often invoke with devotion the names of Jesus and Mary, especially in temptations against purity.
THE THIRD COMMANDMENT OF GOD.
'Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath-day.'
? 1. What are we commanded by the Third Commandment?
By the Third Commandment we are commanded to sanctify the Lord's day by performing works of piety and abstaining from servile works.
? 2. Which is the Lord's day?
In the Old Law it was the seventh day of the week, or the Sabbath-day (day of rest), in memory of God's resting on that day, after He had finished the work of Creation in six days. In the New Law it is the first day of the week, or the Sunday, in memory of the accomplishment of our Redemption, which is a new spiritual Creation (Gal. vi. 15).
'In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them, and rested on the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it' (Exod. XX. 11; comp. Gen. ii. 2, 3).
? 3. How was our Redemption accomplished on the Sunday?
It was on a Sunday that our Saviour rose from the dead, and it was also on a Sunday that He sent down the Holy Ghost upon His Church.
? 4. What works of piety, should we perform on the Sunday?
1. We are bound to hear Mass, and, if possible, we should also attend the other Divine Service, especially the Sermon and Catechetical Instruction; and 2. We should receive the Holy Sacraments, read books of devotion, or meditate on the great truths of our Religion, and occupy ourselves in works of mercy, either corporal or spiritual (James i. 27).
? 5. Which works are servile and forbidden?
All bodily works which are commonly performed by servants, day-laborers, and tradesmen.
"Works by which the mind only is exerted are not numbered amongst the servile works. But all those noisy and those merely worldly employments, which disturb quiet religious observance, such as law-suits, buying and selling, etc., are also forbidden.
? 6. Is it never lawful to do servile work on a Sunday?
It is lawful: 1. When the Pastors of the Church, for weighty reasons, give a dispensation; and 2. As often as the honor of God,1 the good of our neighbor,2 or urgent necessity 3 require it.
It is lawful to engage in occupations which on ac* count of public welfare cannot be interrupted on Sunday, as for example, those of railroad employes, watchmen, bakers, etc.
Persons compelled to work on Sunday should consult a Confessor or Pastor.
Examples: Matt. xii. 1 Officiating in the Temple, v. 5. 2 Parable of the sheep that falls into a pit, v. 11, 12. 3 The Disciples plucking ears of corn, v. 1-4.
? 7. Are they only guilty who themselves do forbidden work?
No; those also are guilty who without any necessity require their inferiors, as servants, day-iaborers, or tradesmen, to do such work, or allow them to do it; for God says: ' That thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest, even as thyself (Deut. v. 14).
? 8. Is the Sunday profaned only by servile work and staying away from Divine Service?
No; it is likewise profaned by debauchery, intemperance, and extravagant games, sports, and amusements, which make of the Lord's day a day of revelry and public scandal.
? 9. What should we particularly consider in order to be deterred from profaning the Sunday?
We should consider;
1. The temporal and eternal punishment with which God threatens such as break the Sabbath.
'They grievously violated my Sabbaths; I said, therefore, that I would pour out my indignation upon them in the desert, and would consume them' (Ezech, xx. 13). 'Keep you my Sabbath; for it is holy unto you: he that shall profane it shall be put to death' (Exod. xxxi. 14).
2. That it is an unjustifiable heedlessness not to devote even so much as one day to the care of our immortal soul, after the body has been taken care of during six days.
3. That the observance of the Sunday is a public profession of our Christian Faith, and, consequently, that by its profanation we bring disgrace on our Religion, and give great scandal to our fellow-Christians.
Zeal of the Jews in keeping holy the Sabbath day (2 Mac. vi. 11).
Application. Always observe the Lord's day conscientiously, and never be induced to violate it, either by thoughtlessness and excessive fondness for amusements, or by the example of wicked or infidel people. 'God be merciful unto us; it is not profitable to us to forsake the law' (1 Mac. ii. 21).
THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT OF GOD.
'Honor thy Father and thy Mother.'
? 1. What is commanded by the Fourth Commandment?
By the Fourth Commandment children are commanded to show reverence, love, and obedience to their parents, and inferiors to their superiors.
? 2. Why must children reverence, love, and obey their parents?
Because, next to God, their parents are their greatest benefactors, and supply His place in their regard.
? 3. How should children reverence their parents?
They should venerate their parents as the representatives Oi God, and should therefore always show them respect in word and deed.
'Honor thy father in work and word, and all patience' (Ecclus. iii, 9).
? 4. How should children love their parents?
They should, 1. Be grateful to them, and wish them well from their heart; 2. They should make them happy by their good conduct; 3. They should assist them in their necessities, and take care of them in their old age; and 4. They should bear with their faults and weaknesses.
'With thy whole heart honor thy father, and forget not the groanings of thy mother. Remember that thou hadst not been born but through them, and make a return to them as they have done for thee' (Ecclus. vii. 28-3d). Example of Jesus, who, when dying on the cross, still provided for His Mother.
? 5. How should children obey their parents?
1. They should do what their parents command, and not do what they forbid, provided they order nothing bad or unjust; and 2. They should willingly receive, and readily follow, their advice and admonitions.
'Children, obey your parents in all things; for this is well pleasing to the Lord' (Col. iii. 20). Example of Jesus, who, though 'God blessed for ever,' yet was subject to Mary and Joseph.
? 6. What have children to expect who faithfully observe the Fourth Commandment?
In this life, they may be sure of God's protection and blessing, and in the other, of eternal happiness.
'Honor thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with a promise; that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest be long-lived upon earth' (Eph. vi. 2, 3). 'Honor thy father, that a blessing may come upon thee from him, and his blessing may remain in the latter end. The father's blessing establisheth the houses of the children, but the mother's curse rooteth up the foundation' (Ecelus. iii. 9-11). — Examples: Sem, Isaac, Ruth, Samuel, young Tobias.
? 7. When do children sin against the reverence they owe to their parents?
They sin against the reverence they owe to their parents, 1. When in their heart they despise or disregard them; 2. When they speak ill of them; 3. When they are ashamed of them; and 4. When they treat them harshly and insolently.
'The eye that mocketh at his father, and that despiseth the labor of his mother in bearing him, let the ravens of the brooks pick it out, and the young eagles eat it' (Prov. xxx. 17).
? 8. When do children sin against the love they owe to their parents?
They sin against the love they owe to their parents, 1. When they wish or do them evil; 2. When, by their bad behavior, they give them trouble, and bring disgrace upon them, or otherwise grieve them, or put them in a passion; 3. When they do not assist them in their need or old age; 4. When they do not bear with their failings; and 5. When they do not pray for their parents, whether living or dead.
'He that striketh his father or mother shall be put to death. He that curseth his father or mother shall die the death' (Exod. xxi. 15, 17). 'Son, support the old age of thy father, and grieve him not in his life; and if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy strength; for the relieving of the father shall not be forgotten' (Ecclus. iii. 14, 15).
? 9. When do children sin against the obedience due to their parents?
They sin against the obedience due to their parents, 1. When they obey them badly, or not at all; 2. When they do not willingly listen to their admonitions; and 3. When they offer resistance to their corrections.
'If a man have a stubborn and unruly son, who will not hear the commandments of his father or mother, and being corrected, slighteth obedience, they shall take him, and bring him to the ancients of the city, and shall say to them: This our son is rebellious and stubborn, he slighteth hearing our admonitions, he giveth himself to revelling, and to debauchery and banquetings: the people of the city shall stone him, and he shall die; that you may take away the evil out of the midst of you, and all Israel hearing it may be afraid' (Deut. xxi. 18-21).
? 10. What have those children to expect who do not fulfil their duties towards their parents?
In this life they have to expect the curse of God, disgrace, and ignominy; and in the life to come, eternal damnation.
'Cursed be he that honoreth not his father and mother, and all the people shall say: Amen' (Deut. xxvii. 16). 'Remember thy father and thy mother, lest God forget thee, and thou wish that thou hadst not been born, and curse the day of thy nativity' (Ecclus. xxiii. 18, 19). — Examples: Cham, Absalom, the Sons oi Heli the High-Priest.
? 11. What superiors, besides our parents, must we honor, love, and obey?
Our guardians, tutors, teachers, employers, masters and mistresses, and all our Spiritual and Civil Superiors.
? 12. What are our duties towards our guardians, tutors, teachers, and employers?
We must consider them as the representatives and assistants of our parents; and, therefore, our duties towards them are in proportion to those which children owe to their parents.
? 13. What are the particular obligations of servants to their masters and mistresses?
They should, for the Lord's sake, show them respectful obedience, and honestly fulfil their contracts towards them (1 Pet. ii. 9, 10).
'Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh, not serving to the eye, as pleasing men, but in simplicity of heart, fearing God. Whatsoever you do, do it from the heart, as to the Lord, and not to men; knowing that you shall receive of the Lord the reward of inheritance' (Col. iii. 22-24). 'Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the forward' (1 Pet. ii. 18).
? 14. How do servants sin against their masters and mistresses?
1. By disobedience, obstinacy, moroseness, and ill-will; 2. By laziness, by pilfering dainties, and by wasting and embezzling their goods; 3. By calumny, detraction, and tale-bearing; and, "most of all, 4. By teaching evil to their children, by assisting them to do evil, or by conniving at it.
? 15. What are our duties towards our Spiritual Superiors?
We are bound, 1. To honor and love them as the representatives of God, and our Spiritual Fathers; 2. To submit to their ordinances; 3. To pray for them; and 4. To provide for their support in the manner established by law and custom.
'With all thy soul fear the Lord, and reverence his priests* (Ecclus. vii. 31). 'Obey your prelates, and be subject to them; for they watch as being to render an account of your souls, that they may do this with joy, and not with grief; for this is not expedient for you' (Hebr, xiii. 17). 'The Lord ordained that they who preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel' (1 Cor. ix. 14; comp. Luke x. 7, and 1 Tim. v. 17, 18). — Example of the Christians, when Peter was in prison (Acts xii.; comp. Gal. IV. 14, 15).
? 16. When do we sin against our Spiritual Superiors?
1. When, by word or deed, we violate the reverence due to them, or when, by speaking ill of them, we lower their character; 2. When we oppose them, and thereby may be the cause of schism and scandal; and 3. When, contrary to our duty, we refuse to contribute towards their support, and to provide for the Divine Service.
'He that despiseth you, despiseth me' (Luke x. 16). 'The Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be tormented; and especially them who despise government, audacious, self-willed, they fear not to bring in sects, blaspheming. They allure by the desires of fleshly riotousness those who for a little while escape, such as converse in error: promising them liberty, whereas they themselves are the slaves of corruption' (2 Pet. ii.). 'Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and have perished in the contradiction of Core' (Jude 11). — Examples: Core, Dathan, and Abiron, swallowed up by the earth (Num. xvi.); Forty-two boys torn by two bears (4 Kings ii. 24).
? 17. What are our duties towards our Civil, or Temporal, Rulers?
We are bound, 1. To show to our Civil Rulers, ordained by God. respect, fidelity, and conscientious obedience, and to suffer anything rather than raise sedition against them; 2. To pay the taxes imposed by them; and 3. To assist them in their necessities and dangers; and even to sacrifice our property and life in defence of our country against its enemies.
'Let every soul be subject to higher powers; for there is no power but from God, and those that are, are ordained of God, Therefore, he that resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist, purchase to themselves damnation. Wherefore be subject of necessity, not only for wrath, but also for conscience ' sake. Render therefore to all men their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor' (Rom. xiii. 1-7). — Examples: Jesus and the first Christians. David towards Saul (1 Kings xxiv, 7).
? 18. How do we sin against our Civil Rulers?
1. By hatred and contempt; 2. By reviling and blaspheming them; 3. By refusing to pay the taxes due to them; 4. By resistance and rebellion; and 5. By any sort of treason, violence, or conspiracy, against our Government and country.
Of those 'who despise dominion, and blaspheme majesty,' the Apostle St. Jude says: 'These are murmurers, full of complaints, walking according to their own desires, and their mouth speaketh proud things, admiring persons for gain's sake' (Jude 8 and 16).
? 19. When are parents, superiors, and sovereigns not to be obeyed?
When they command anything unlawful before God.
*We ought to obey God rather than men' (Acts vii. 29). — Examples: Joseph in the house of Putiphar; Susanna; the three Young Men at Babylon; the seven Machabees; the Apostles before the Council.
? 20. How should young people behave towards the aged?
Young people should treat the aged respectfully, listen to their good advice, and, as far as possible, lighten the burden of their old age.
'Rise up before the hoary head, and honor the person of the aged man, and fear the Lord thy God' (Levit. xix. 32).
Application. Hearken now to your parents, teachers, Pastors, etc., and follow them, 'Lest thou mourn at the last, and say: Why have I hated instruction, and my heart consented not to reproof, and have not heard the voice of them that taught me. and have not inclined my ear to masters?' (Prov. v. 11-13).
