Part II: The Commandments · Chapter II: The Ten Commandments of God (3 of 4)
? 21. Does the Fourth Commandment regard children and inferiors only?
It includes also the duties of parents and superiors.
? 22. What are the duties of parents towards their children?
The first and most sacred duty of parents is to bring up their children for God and for eternal life. Therefore they should, 1. Teach them well themselves, and get them well instructed in the Catholic Religion; 2. Train them up, as early as possible, to a pious and virtuous life; 3. Set them good example; 4. Guard them against being led into sinful or dangerous courses; and 5. Correct their faults with Christian charity.
'And you, fathers, bring your children up in the discipline and correction of the Lord' (Ephes. vi. 4). 'The child that is left to his own will, bringeth his mother to shame' (Prov. xxix. 15). 'Withhold not correction from a child; for if thou strike him with the rod, he shall not die, and thou shalt deliver his soul from hell' (Prov. xxiii. 13, 14).
? 23. How do parents sin when they neglect these their duties?
They sin grievously, and, moreover, render themselves accessory to the sins of their children, and often are the cause of their eternal damnation (Hell).
? 24. Have parents charge only of the ' eternal ' salvation of their children?
They have charge also of their temporal welfare and success; therefore they sin, 1. When they inconsiderately squander their property; 2. When they do not take proper care of the food, clothing, or health of their children; or 3. When they neglect to accustom them early to labor, and to make them learn something useful.
Parents must not unreasonably interfere with their children's liberty in the choice of a state of life or a partner in marriage.
? 25. What are the duties of masters and mistresses towards their servants?
They should, 1. Not treat them, harshly, but kindly; 2. Give them their just wages and sufficient nourishment; 3. Urge them, by word and example, to fulfil their religious duties, and to do all that is right; and 4. Keep them from evil and all occasions of sin.
'If thou have a faithful servant, let him be to thee as thy own soul: treat him as a brother' (Ecclus. xxxiii. 31). 'Masters, do to your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that you also have a Master in Heaven' (Coloss. iv. 1). 'But if any man have not care of his own, and especially of those of his house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel' (1 Tim. V. 8).
? 26. What are the obligations of Civil Rulers to their inferiors?
Civil Rulers are ordained by God for the good of the people; therefore they should, 1. Promote public welfare as much as lies in their power; 2. Perform the duties of their office with wisdom and incorruptible justice; 3. Punish evil; and 4. Be to all a pattern of a Christian life.
'The power is God's minister to thee for good' (Rom. xiii. 4). 'And charging the judges, Josaphat said: Take heed what you do; for you exercise not the judgment of man, but of the Lord; and whatsoever you judge, it shall redound to you. There is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor desire of gifts' (2 Paral. xix. 6, 7). Therefore, at elections for public offices, it is necessary, above all things, to consider piety, judgment, and an honest and energetic will in the person to be elected.
Application. Always honor your Civil Rulers as the ministers of God for your own good, and never listen to those enemies of all law and order, who 'promise liberty, whereas they themselves are the slaves of corruption' (2 Peter ii. 19). Besides observing the laws, all are bound to live together in harmony, as far as possible, and to endeavor, each according to his means and ability, to promote virtue, peace, good order and the common welfare.
THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT OF GOD.
'Thou Shalt not kill.'
? 1. What sins does the Fifth Commandment forbid?
The Fifth Commandant forbids all sins by which we may injure our neighbor or ourselves, whether as to the life of the body or of the soul.
? 2. When do we injure our neighbor as to the life of his body?
1. When we kill, strike, or wound him in an unjust manner; and 2. When, by vexation or harsh treatment, we embitter and shorten his life.
? 3. What sin does he commit who deliberately kills his neighbor in an unjust manner?
He commits the heinous sin of murder that cries to Heaven for vengeance; for 1. He wantonly invades the rights of God; 2. He undermines the safety of human society; and 3. He plunges his neighbor into the greatest temporal, and often into eternal, ruin.
The deliberate destruction of infant life before birth, even in its earliest stages, as is sometimes done by surgeons, physicians, nurses, and others is nothing less than wilful murder.
'Whosoever shall shed man's blood, his blood shall be shed; for man was made to the image of God' (Gen. ix. 6). How murder is punished, even in this life, by tormenting remorse, and often by an ignominious death, we learn from the examples of Cain (Gen. iv. 16), of Ahab and Jezabel (3 Kings xxi. xxii., and 4 Kings ix.).
? 4. Is it ever lawful to destroy human life?
Yes, it is lawful, 1. For the supreme authority to do so in the execution of criminals (Rom. xiii. 4); and 2. For others, in defence of their country, or, when necessary, in protecting life from unjust attack.
? 5. Is it also lawful to send a man a challenge, or to accept his, to a duel in defence of our honor?
No; for such a duel in any case, even if it be not for life and death, is a great crime, which is in direct opposition to all order established by God and man; therefore all those who are accessory to it, even all voluntary witnesses, incur excommunication.
? 6. Does the Fifth Commandment forbid only the actual crime of taking away the life of our neighbor?
It also forbids everything that leads and induces to the crime; as anger, hatred, envy, quarrelling, abusive words, and imprecations.
'Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer' (1 John iii. 15). 'But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment' (Matt. v. 22).
? 7. When do we injure ourselves as to the life of our body?
1. When we take away our life; and 2. When we impair our health, or shorten our life, by intemperance in eating and drinking, by violent anger, by immoderate grief, etc.
? 8. What sin does he commit who deliberately makes away with himself?
He commits three horrible crimes: 1. A crime against the Divine Majesty, who alone has power over life and death; 2, A crime against his own soul, which he mercilessly plunges into eternal hell-fire; and 3. A crime against human society, and especially against his relations, on whom he brings inexpressible grief and disgrace.
? 9. How does the Church, therefore, punish suicide, or self-murder?
She refuses Christian burial to the self-murderer, for his own punishment, as well as to deter others from doing the same.
? 10. Are we never allowed to expose our life or our health to danger?
Never without necessity; but, when a higher duty requires it we may (Matt. x. 28).
? 11. May we desire our own death?
No, we may not when the desire proceeds from dejection or despair; but we may when we ardently desire to offend God no more, and to be united with Him in Heaven.
'I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ' (Phili. i. 23).
? 12. When do we injure our neighbor as to the life of his soul?
When we scandalize him; that is, when we deliberately seduce him to sin, or voluntarily influence him, and give him occasion, to commit it.
? 13. Who render themselves guilty of this sin?
In general, all those who in any way incite, advise, or help others to do evil, command them to do it, or approve of it; and in particular those, 1. Who use impious or filthy language, or dress themselves immodestly; 2. Who spread abroad bad books and pictures; 3. Who open their houses to thieves, drunkards, gamblers, or other wicked men, for their unlawful meetings; and 4. Those superiors who give bad example, or who do not hinder evil, as they are in duty bound to do.
? 14. What should in particular deter us from giving scandal?
1. The thought that he who gives scandal is a minister of Satan, destroying those souls which Jesus Christ has ransomed with His blood, by seducing them to sin.
'He [the devil] was a murderer from the beginning' (John viii. 44). 'Destroy not him, for whom Christ died' (Rom. xiv. 15).
2. The dreadful consequences of seduction, since those who have themselves been seduced generally seduce others, and thus the sin is continually propagated.
The whole human race corrupted through the descendants of Cain (Gen. vi.). Jeroboam's sin and punishment (3 Kings xii-xiv.).
3. The awful sentence of Jesus Christ.
'He that shall scandalize one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone should be hanged about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the sea. Woe to the world because of scandals; woe to that man by whom the scandal cometh' (Matt, xviii. 6, 7). Example of Eleazar, who chose to die rather than scandalize young men (2 Mac. vi.); and of St. Paul (1 Cor. viii. 13).
? 15. What must we do when we have injured our neighbor as to his body or soul?
We must not only repent and confess the sin, but we must also, as far as it is in our power, repair the evil We have done.
? 16. What are we ' commanded ' by the Fifth Commandment?
We are commanded, 1. To live in peace and union with our neighbor; 2. To promote, according to our condition, his spiritual as well as his corporal welfare; and 3. To take also reasonable care of our own life and health.
Application. Never presume to curse, to abuse, or to strike any one; but, as it is becoming to a child of God, be peaceable, kind, and meek. Shun a seducer, as the devil; for he is about to kill your soul, let his words or promises be ever so charming and pleasing. Beware of murdering your neighbor's soul by any scandalous act or word.
THE SIXTH AND NINTH COMMANDMENTS OF GOD.
'Thou shalt not commit adultery.'
'Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife.'
I. What does the Sixth Commandment forbid?
The Sixth Commandment forbids, 1. Adultery and all sins of impurity; as unchaste looks, words, jests, touches, and whatsoever else violates modesty.; and 2. Everything that leads to impurity.
'But fornication and all uncleanness let it not so much as be
named among you, as becometh saints, or obscenity, or foolish talking, or scurrility' (Eph. v. 3, 4).
? 2. What is it that generally leads to impurity?
1. Curiosity of the eyes; 2. Immodest dress; 3. Flatterers or seducers; 4. Obscene books and scandalous pictures; 5. Nocturnal interviews, indecent plays and dances; 6. A too free intercourse with the other sex; 7. Drunkenness and revelry; and 8. Idleness and effeminacy.
? 3. What does the Ninth Commandment forbid?
The Ninth Commandment especially forbids the desire to have another man's wife, and, in general, all impure thoughts and desires.
' Whosoever shall look on a woman to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart' (Matt. v. 28).
? 4. Are impure thoughts and desires always sins?
As long as they displease us, and we endeavor to banish them from our mind, they are not sins.
? 5. When do we sin by impure thoughts?
We sin by impure thoughts when we voluntarily represent immodest things or actions to our mind, and when we voluntarily take pleasure in them.
As it is a sin against purity designedly to look at immodest things, so it is also a sin to represent such things to our mind, or, when such representations are involuntary, willingly to take complacency or pleasure in them.
? 6. When do we sin by impure desires?
We sin by impure desires when we voluntarily wish to see, hear, or do something that is contrary to chastity or purity.
? 7. What should we do when we are tempted by impure thoughts and desires?
1. We should, in the very beginning, earnestly resist them, and implore the assistance of God; and 2. When the temptation continues, we should not be discouraged, but persevere in our resistance, and endeavor to occupy our minds with some good subject.
1. 'As I knew that I could not otherwise be continent, except God gave it, I went to the Lord, and besought Him with my whole heart' (Wisd. viii. 21). 2. 'Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he hath been proved, he shall receive the crown of life' (James i. 12).
? 8. Why must we most carefully guard against impurity?
1. Because no sin is more shameful; and 2. Because none is attended with such dreadful consequences.
? 9. Why is this sin so shameful?
Because man, who, as the image and temple of God, is called to a pure and holy life, is degraded by it to the level of an impure or unclean animal; whence it is styled. Sin of impurity or uncleanness (comp. 1 Cor. iii. 17).
? 10. What are the consequences of impurity?
1. It robs man of his innocence, and infects his body and soul; 2. It leads him to many other sins and vices, and often to murder and despair; and 3. It plunges him into misery, ignominy, and shame, and finally into eternal damnation.
'He that joineth himself to harlots will be wicked: rottenness and worms shall inherit him' (Ecclus. xix. 3). 'The whoremongers shall have their portion in the pool burning with fire and brimstone' (Apoc. xxi. 8).
Examples: Impurity led David,' Solomon, the two Elders (Dan, xiii.), Herod, and Herodias into the greatest crimes. Chiefly on account of impurity, nearly the entire human race was destroyed by the Deluge; Sodom and Gomorrha, by a rain of brimstone and fire; twenty-four thousand Israelites were put to death in the desert; and almost the whole tribe of Benjamin perished by the sword.
? 11. Is every sin of impurity a grievous sin?
Yes, every sin of impurity which one commits knowingly and willingly, either with himself or with others, is a mortal sin; ' for know you this and understand,' says St. Paul (Ephes. v. 5), 'that no fornicator, or unclean person, hath inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.'
? 12. Are all sins of impurity equally grievous?
No; some are more grievous than others, according to the persons with whom the sin is committed; or according as the sin is more heinous and unnatural, and its consequences are more pernicious.
? 13. What are we to do when we doubt whether anything is a sin against purity?
We must consult our Director, and in the meantime carefully avoid what we are doubtful of.
? 14. What are we 'commanded' by the Sixth and Ninth Commandments?
We are commanded to be decent and modest in all our thoughts, looks, words, and actions, and to preserve most carefully the innocence of our soul as the greatest good and the most beautiful ornament of man.
? 15. What means should we employ in order to preserve our innocence?
We should, 1. Shun all bad company and all occasions of sin (Ecclus. iii. 27); 2. Carefully guard our senses, especially our eyes (Psalm cxviii. 37); 3. Often receive the Holy Sacraments; 4. In temptation recommend ourselves to God and to the Blessed Virgin; 5. Remember that God sees everything, and that we may die at any moment (Ecclus. vii. 40); and 6. We should earnestly exercise ourselves in humility, in the mortification of the flesh, and in self-denial (Gal. v. 24).
Application. Love the innocence of your soul; often meditate on these words of the Holy Scripture: ' Oh! how beautiful is the chaste generation with glory; for the memory thereof is immortal, because it is known both with God and with men. It triumpheth crowned for ever, winning the reward of undefiled conflicts' (Wisd. iv. 1, 2). Therefore, whether you are by yourself or with others, never say or do anything that may not be said or done before people of propriety; and should any one attempt to lead you to what is wrong, repulse him or seek for the protection of others. 'My son, if sinners shall entice thee, consent not to them. If they shall say: Come with us; my son, walk not thou with them' (Prov. i. 10-15). Avoid all immoral books, magazines and newspapers. ( See note to quest. 9, First Commandment. )
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT OF GOD.
'Thou shalt not steal.'
? 1. What does the Seventh Commandment forbid?
The Seventh Commandment forbids us to injure our neighbor in his property by robbery or theft, by cheating, usury, or in any other unjust way.
? 2. Who are guilty of robbery or theft?
Not only those who are properly called robbers and thieves, but also all those, 1. Who give them advice or assistance; 3. Who buy, sell, hide, or keep stolen goods; 3. Who do not return the things they have found or borrowed; 4. Who do not pay their debts; and 5. All those who beg without need, and thus defraud the real poor of their alms.
? 3. How is fraud committed?
1. By injuring, openly or secretly, our neighbor's property or business; 3. By giving false weight or measure, or bad money, or practising any other deceit in buying or selling; 4. By refusing to pay our lawful debts when we can do so.
? 4. How, also, may servants and employees be guilty of fraud?
1. By disposing of their employer's property without his consent; 2. By wasting time or material; and by disregarding just agreements or contracts which they have made with their employers.
Servants may not give alms of the property of their employers without their consent.
? 5. In what other ways may we sin against the Seventh Commandment?
1. By gambling and other extravagances injurious to one's family; 2. By evading our just share of public burdens, such as paying taxes; 3. By wasting or appropriating public money unjustly; 4. By usurious practices.
? 6. Who are guilty of usurious practices?
1. Those who exact unlawful interest for money loaned; 2. Those who purchase in large quantities articles of food and other necessaries, in order to obtain more than a just price for them; 3. In general, those who in trade take unfair advantage of their neighbor's ignorance or necessity.
? 7. May we also grievously sin against the Seventh Commandment by petty thefts or frauds?
Yes: 1. When we so often repeat them that the owner suffers a considerable loss, and even when we have only the intention of thus repeating them; and 2. When the loss of a thing, trifling in itself, causes our neighbor a considerable injury.
? 8. What must we do when we are in possession of ill-gotten goods or have unjustly injured our neighbor?
We must restore the ill-gotten goods, and repair, as far as we are able, the injury done; without this we cannot obtain pardon from God.
? 9. Who is bound to make restitution or reparation?
1. He who is in possession of the thin,o-s stolen, or of their value, or who has really done the injury.
2. If he does not do it, the obligation devolves on those who, by counsel or action, were accessory to the sin, or who did not hinder it, although they were able to do so, and were bound by the duties of their station or office to hinder the wrong.
? 10. How much must be restored?
1. If one has knowingly and unjustly taken or detained his neighbor's goods, he must fully compensate him.
2. If he did it unknowingly and unwillingly, he must, as soon as he comes to know that it is another man's property, restore all that is still left and as much more as his wealth has increased by it.
In the former case, full restitution must be made not only of the things stolen, or, if they are gone, of their value, but also of that which, in the meantime, they have produced; those expenses, however, being deducted which even the owner would not have been able to avoid. And, in general, the owner must be compensated for all the profits which he has been deprived of, and for all the losses he has suffered. In the latter case, we are bound to restore all that which, after deducting the expenses, is still remaining of the ill-gotten goods and of their produce, and, in general, as much as, by their possession and temporary use, we have become the richer.
? 11. To whom must restitution of the ill-gotten goods be made?
To the owner or to his heirs; but if this be not possible, they must be given to the poor or be appropriated to religious and charitable purposes.
? 12. What must they do who cannot immediately make restitution?
They must sincerely have the intention of doing so as soon as they can; and, in the meantime, they must employ all reasonable means to enable themselves to perform this duty.
? 13. What should we bear in mind in order to guard against stealing, or against neglecting to make restitution?
1. That death will at length wrest the ill-gotten goods from us, and perhaps sooner than we expect; 2. That the stolen property will bring us, not happiness and blessing, but misfortune and malediction, uneasiness and a miserable end;1 and 3. That there is no greater foolishness than to forfeit Heaven for the perishable things of this world, and to plunge our soul into unquenchable fire.2
1'He who soweth iniquity shall reap evils' (Prov. xxii. 8). 2 ' What doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and suffer the loss of his own soul? Or what exchange shall a man give for his soul?' (Matt. xvi. 26).
? 14. What are we commanded by the Seventh Commandment?
We are commanded to give to every one his due, and to be charitable to our neighbor.
