Part II: The Commandments · Chapter V: Virtue and Christian Perfection
CHAPTER V.
Virtue and Christian Perfection.
I. Should we be contented with avoiding grievous sins and crimes?
No; we should also diligently endeavor to become more and more virtuous, and to attain the perfection suitable to our condition.
' He that is just, let him be justified still; and he that is holy, let him be sanctified still' (Apoc. xxii. 11). 'Be not afraid to be justified even to death' (Ecclus. xxiii. 22). — Example of St. Paul: 'Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect; but I follow after. . . . One thing I do; forgetting the things that are behind, and stretching forth myself to those that are before' (Philip iii. 12, 13).
§1. Virtue.
? 2. Why should we endeavor to become more and more virtuous?
Because man is only good, and pleasing to God, inasmuch as he is virtuous.
? 3. In what does Christian virtue consist?
Christian virtue, in general, consists in the perseverance of the will, and in its constant exertions to do what is acceptable to God.
? 4. How is Christian virtue divided with regard to its origin?
Into infused and acquired virtue.
? 5. What is infused virtue?
Virtue is called infused, inasmuch as it is a gift of God, which together with sanctifying grace is imparted to the soul, in order to qualify and dispose us for the practice of supernatural virtues — i.e., for the performance of such pious actions as are worthy of life everlasting (Rom. V. 5).
? 6. Which virtues are chiefly infused into the soul?
The three Theological Virtues: Faith, Hope, and Charity.
? 7. Why are they called 'Theological Virtues'?
Because they come directly from, and directly relate to, God.
? 8. When should we make Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity?
We should make them frequently, but especially, 1. In great temptations against these virtues; 2. When we receive the Holy Sacraments; and 3. When we are in danger of losing our life, or on our death-bed.
? 9. How may we make Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity?
We may make them in this manner:
AN ACT OF FAITH.
O my God! I firmly believe that Thou art one God in three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. I believe that the Divine Son became man, and died for our sins, and that He will come to judge the living and the dead. I believe these and all the truths which the Holy Catholic Church teaches, because Thou hast revealed them, who canst neither deceive nor be deceived.
AN ACT OF HOPE.
O my God! relying on Thy infinite goodness and promises, I hope to obtain pardon of my sins, the help of Thy grace, and life everlasting, through the merits of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Redeemer.
AN ACT OF CHARITY.
O my God! I love Thee above all things, with my whole heart and soul, because Thou are all-good and worthy of all love. I love my neighbor as myself for the love of Thee. I forgive all who have injured me, and ask pardon of all whom I have injured.
Charity here means love.
? 10. What is acquired virtue?
Virtue is called acquired, inasmuch as it is a faculty which, with the assistance of God, we acquire by constant practice.
? 11. What do we generally call those virtues which can be acquired by practice?
We call them 'Moral Virtues', because they regulate our moral conduct according to the will of God.
? 12. Which among them are the four 'Cardinal'1 or 'Principal Virtues' in which all the others are included?
1. Prudence; 2. Justice; 3. Fortitude: and 4. Temperance (Wis. viii. 7).
1They are called Cardinal virtues, because they are, as it were, the hinges ( Carolines) by which the. whole moral life of a Christian is supported, and on which it must constantly move.
? 13. What is ' Prudence'?
Prudence is a virtue which makes us discern what is truly good and agreeable to God from what only appears to be so, and thus prevents our being seduced to evil.
'Be not conformed to this world, but be reformed in the new ness of your mind, that you may prove what is the good, and the acceptable, and the perfect will of God' (Rom. xii. 2). 'Beware of false prophets' (Matt. vii. 15). — Examples: The impiudent Josaphat (2 Paral. xix. 2); the wise Virgins (Matt. XXV.).
? 14. What is ' Justice '?
Justice is a virtue by which we are always determined to do what is right, and, therefore, always disposed to give every one his due.
'Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and to God the things that are God's' (Matt. xxii. 21). — Example: Tobias (Tobias ii. 21).
? 15. What is ' Fortitude '?
Fortitude is a virtue which enables us to endure any hardship or persecution, rather than abandon our duty.
Examples: The seven Machabees and their mother, who esteemed the torments as nothing (2 Mac. vii. 12).
? 16. What is ' Temperance '?
Temperance is a virtue which restrains our sensual inclinations and desires, that they may not allure us from virtue.
'Refrain yourselves from carnal desires, which war against the soul' (1 Pet. ii. 11). — Example: Esther (Esth. xiv. 14, 15-18).
? 17. What virtues are especially opposite to the seven Capital Sins?
1. Humility; 2. Liberality; 3. Chastity; 4. Meekness; 5. Temperance in eating and drinking; 6. Brotherly love; and 7. Diligence.
? 18. What is ' Humility '?
Humility is a virtue which teaches us to acknowledge our own unworthiness, weakness, and sinfulness, and to look upon all good as coming from God.
Examples: Abraham (Gen. xviii. 27); the Publican (Luke xviii. 13); St. Paul (1 Cor. xv. 8, 9). 'Unless you become as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven' (Matt, xviii. 3).
? 19. What is ' Liberality '?
Liberality is a virtue which inclines us to use our property for the relief of the needy, or for other laudable purposes.
Examples: Tobias (Tob. i. 19, 20); Solomon (3 Kings v.viii.); the first Christians (Acts ii. 45). 'Give, and it shall be given to you' (Luke vi. 38).
? 20. What is ' Chastity '?
Chastity is a virtue which subdues all impure inclinations and desires by which modesty is violated.
Examples: Joseph, Susanna, and, above all, the Blessed Virgin Mary. 'They that are Christ's have crucified their flesh with the vices and concupiscences' (Gal. v. 24).
? 21. What is ' Meekness '?
Meekness is a virtue which suppresses all desire of revenge, and any motion of unjust anger and displeasure.
Examples: David (1 Kings xxiv. and xxvi.); St. Stephen (Acts vii. 58). 'Learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart' (Matt. xi. 29).
? 22. What is ' Temperance in eating and drinking '?
Temperance in eating and drinking is a virtue by which we control ourselves, especially our appetite for eating and drinking.
Examples: Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Azarias (Dan. i.); John the Baptist (Matt. iii. 4). 'Let us walk honestly, not in rioting and drunkenness' (Rom. xiii. 13).
? 23. What is ' Brotherly Love '?
Brotherly love is a virtue by which we wish every one well, and sincerely rejoice and condole with our neighbor.
Examples: The history of Ruth and of Tobias. ' Love one an- other with the charity of brotherhood. Rejoice with them that rejoice; weep with them that weep' (Rom. xii. 10, 15).
? 24. What is ' Diligence '?
Diligence is a virtue which enables us to serve God readily and cheerfully, to promote His honor as much as lies in our power, and faithfully to perform all our duties.
Examples: Mathathias (1 Mac. ii.); St. Paul (Philip, iii. 13, 14). 'In carefulness [be] not slothful; in spirit fervent; serving the Lord' (Rom. xii. 11;.
Application. Unless you perseveringly struggle with your wicked inclinations, you will never acquire the Christian Virtues; therefore fight faithfully until death, and God will give you the crown of life (Apoc. ii. 10).
§ 2. On Christian Perfection.
? 25. Why should we all endeavor to attain the perfection suitable to our condition?
1. Because our Lord and Saviour says to all: 'Be you perfect, as also your Heavenly Father is perfect' (Matt, v. 48);
2. Because we are commanded to love God with our whole heart, and with our whole soul, and with our whole mind, and with our whole strength (Mark xii. 30);
3. Because the more holy our life is upon earthy the greater will be our happiness in Heaven; and
4. Because we easily fall into grievous sin, and finally run into eternal perdition, if we do not continually endeavor to increase in virtue (Matt. xxv. 29).
? 26. In what does Christian Perfection consist?
Christian Perfection consists in this: that, free from all inordinate love of the world and of ourselves, we love God above all, and all in God.
' What have I in Heaven? and besides Thee what do I desire upon earth? Thou art the God of my heart, and the God that is my portion for ever' (Psalm lxxii, 25, 26).
? 27. Which is in general the way to Perfection?
The imitation of Jesus Christ.
'If thou wilt be perfect, . . . and come, follow me' (Matt. xix. 21).
? 28. What particular means of attaining Perfection have been recommended by Jesus Christ?
Chiefly those which are called ' Evangelical Counsels. '
? 29. Which are the Evangelical Counsels?
1. Voluntary Poverty; 2. Perpetual Chastity; and 3. Entire Obedience to a Spiritual Superior.
? 30. What is ' Voluntary Poverty '?
It is a free renunciation of all temporal things, in order to be less distracted in striving for those that are eternal.
'If thou wilt be perfect, go sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in Heaven; and come, follow me' (Matt. xix. 21).
? 31. What is 'Perpetual Chastity'?
It is a free and perpetual renunciation, not only of all impure pleasure, but even of marriage, in order that we may render undivided service to God.
See Matt. xix. 10-12. 'Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord, but I give counsel: ... He that giveth his virgin in marriage, doth well; and he that giveth her not, doth better' (1 Cor. vii. 25, 38). 'If any one shall say that the marriage state, is to be preferred to the state of virginity, or of celibacy, and that it is not better and more blessed to remain in virginity, or in celibacy, than to be united in matrimony, let him be anathema' (Counc. of Trent, Sess. 24, Can. 10).
? 32. What is ' Entire Obedience '?
It is a renunciation of one's own will, in order to do the Divine will more surely under a Superior who represents God (Matt. xvi. 24).
? 33. Why are the Evangelical Counsels special means of Perfection?
1. Because by them the chief obstacles to Christian Perfection are removed — namely, the inordinate love and desire of earthly goods, sensual pleasures, and the pride of independence; and 2. Because by them man sacrifices to the Lord his God all that he has and is: his exterior goods, by the vow of poverty; his body, by the vow of chastity; and his mind or will, by the vow of obedience.
Of these Evangelical Counsels our Divine Redeemer meant to speak when He said: 'All men take not this word, but they to whom it is given' (Matt, xix, 11).
? 34. Who are obliged to observe the Evangelical Counsels?
All Religious, and all those who have bound themselves by vow to keep them.
The Secular Clergy also, when they receive the Greater Orders, bind themselves to perpetual chastity, in order to be able to devote themselves entirely, and with an undivided heart, to the service of God and of their neighbor. ' He that is without a wife is solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please God. But he that is with a wife is solicitous for the things of the world, how he may please his wife; and he is divided' (1 Cor. vii. 32, 33).
? 35. Can people in the world also lead a perfect life?
Yes, if they do not live according to the spirit of the world, but according to the spirit of Jesus Christ.
'If any man love the world, the charity of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the world is the concupiscence of the flesh, and the concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life' (1 John ii. 15, 16). 'Whosoever will be a friend of this world becometh an enemy of God' (James iv. 4). 'If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His' (Rom. viii. 9).
? 36. Is, then, the spirit of the world at variance with the spirit of Christ?
Most certainly it is, as we distinctly see from those sentences of our Saviour which are called the ' Eight Beatitudes.'
? 37. Which are the Eight Beatitudes?
1. 'Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.
2. Blessed are the meek; for they shall possess the land.
3. Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.
4. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice; for they shall have their fill.
5. Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy.
6. Blessed are the clean of heart; for they shall see God.
7. Blessed are the peace-makers; for they shall be called the children of God.
8. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven' (Matt. V. 3-10).
? 38. How do we know from the Eight Beatitudes that the spirit of the world is at variance with the spirit of Christ?
We know it from this: that the world esteems those very persons miserable and foolish whom Christ our Lord calls blessed.
The world is accustomed to set forth riches, reputation, honors, and sensual pleasures as the sources of happiness; Jesus Christ, on the contrary, teaches us in the Eight Beatitudes to seek our happiness in God and in His holy service, and, therefore, willingly and cheerfully to endure poverty, persecution, and any hardships that may fall to our lot.
? 39. What means must a Christian use, let his condition be what it may, in order to attain to Perfection?
He must, 1. Delight in prayer, diligently hear the word of God, and often receive the Holy Sacraments; 2. He must steadily subdue and deny himself; and 3. He must perform his daily actions in the state of grace, and in a manner acceptable to God.
1, 'They were persevering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in the communication of the breaking of bread, and in prayers' (Acts ii. 42). 2. *If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me' (Matt. xvi. 24). 3. 'Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do, do all to the glory of God' (1 Cor. x. 31).
? 40. How should we deny ourselves?
We should refuse ourselves many things that are dear and agreeable to us, and should deprive ourselves of lawful things, that we may the more easily abstain from unlawful ones.
? 41. How may we most easily perform our daily actions m a manner acceptable to God?
By representing to ourselves how Jesus Christ performed them, and by striving to imitate Him for His sake.
? 42. How should we do our daily work after the example of Christ?
We should do it diligently, patiently, and with a view to please God. Therefore we should form a good intention at the beginning, and renew it sometimes when the work is of long continuance.
? 43. What should we do when we take our meals?
We should before and after meals say grace, reverently and devoutly, and be temperate and modest at table.
? 44. May we also be allowed to take recreation?
Yes; for nothing forbids our taking proper recreation in due time. We should, however, sanctify it by a good intention and by the remembrance of God, and keep within the bounds of modesty.
? 45. What should our intercourse with our neighbor be?
It should be, 1. Kind, that we may not offend any one; and 2. Prudent, that we may not in any manner be seduced to evil.
? 46. How should we act in our afflictions?
We should remember and feel that they come from God, and we should offer them up to Him, and beg of Him the grace necessary to make a good use of them.
Application. Think that these words, which God Spoke to Abraham, are also addressed to you : ' Walk before me, and be perfect ' (Gen. xvii. 1). Strive earnestly to become daily more pious and virtuous. Let this be every morning your resolution, and every night examine your conscience upon it. ' My son, serve God with a perfect heart and a willing mind; for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the thoughts of minds. If thou seek Him, thou shalt find Him; but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off for ever' (1 Par. xxviii. 9).
