Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter II: The Sacraments (1 of 6)
CHAPTER II.
The Sacraments.
? 1. What is a Sacrament?
A Sacrament is a visible, or sensible, sign, instituted by Jesus Christ, by which invisible grace and inward sanctification are communicated to our souls.
By sensible is meant something that can be perceived by some of the senses.
? 2. How many things are necessary to constitute a Sacrament?
These three: 1. A visible sign; 2. An invisible grace; and 3. The institution by Jesus Christ.
? 3. Why has Christ instituted visible signs for imparting his grace to us?
1. That we may have a visible pledge of the inward invisible grace; and 2. That by sharing in these visible means of grace, we may manifest our communion with the one Church of Christ.
Thus Christ himself sometimes made use of certain signs when He conferred spiritual and corporal blessings on people; for instance, when He breathed on His Disciples, and said: ' 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost' (John xx, 22); when 'He spat on the ground and made clay of the spittle, and spread the clay upon the eyes of the man born blind' (John ix. 6); when 'He put His fingers into the ears of the man deaf and dumb, and spitting, He touched his tongue, and looking up to Heaven, He groaned, and said to Him: Ephpheta, which is, Be thou opened' (Mark vii. 33, 34).
? 4. Do these signs only signify grace?
No; they also effect or produce the grace which they signify, unless we, on our part, put an obstacle in the way; therefore they are also called efficacious signs.
? 5. What grace do the Sacraments effect?
1. They communicate, or increase, sanctifying grace;
2. Each Sacrament communicates other special graces according to the end for which it has been instituted.
? 6. How must we receive the Sacraments, in order that they may produce these graces in us?
We must prepare ourselves well for them, and then receive them worthily.
? 7. What sin does he commit who receives a Sacrament unworthily?
He commits a very grievous sin — a sacrilege.
? 8. Does not the efficacy of the Sacraments also depend on the worthiness or unworthiness of those who administer them?
'No; for the Sacraments have their efficacy, not from him who administers them, but from the merits of Jesus Christ, by whom they were instituted.
The Sacraments are, as it were, channels through which flow to us the graces which Jesus has merited for us by His bitter Passion and death.
? 9. Were all the Sacraments instituted by Christ?
Yes; for God alone can give to outward signs the power of producing grace and sanctification.
? 10. How many Sacraments has Christ instituted?
These seven: 1. Baptism; 2, Confirmation; 3. Holy Eucharist; 4. Penance; 5. Extreme Unction; 6. Holy Orders; and 7. Matrimony.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has instituted just as many Sacraments as are necessary and conducive to the supernatural life of man. For as he is first born into this natural life, then grows up and acquires strength, is frequently supplied with nourishing food, in order to preserve life and to increase his strength, etc.; so also he is, 1. Born in Baptism to the supernatural life; gains then, 2. In Confirmation strength and growth; 3. Receives in the Holy Eucharist a Divine nourishment; 4. Finds in Penance a remedy to heal all the diseases of his soul, and to restore him to the state of grace; and 5. Gets in Extreme Unction assistance and strength against despair and the last assaults of the devil; 6, In Holy Orders the powers of administrating the means of grace necessary to the supernatural life are propagated; and 7. In Matrimony the union between husband and wife is blessed, that, being sanctified themselves, they may also bring up their children to a holy, and consequently to eternal, life.
? 11. How do we know that there are seven Sacraments?
We know it because such has been at all times the teaching and practice of the Church, 'which is the pillar and ground of the truth' (1 Tim. iii. 15).
Not only have the Catholics of all ages held them, but the modern Greeks, the Russians, and all those sects who in the first centuries separated themselves from the Catholic Church, have ever retained and still hold these seven Sacraments; which evidently proves that the doctrine of seven Sacraments is as old as the Church itself.
? 12. How are the Sacraments divided?
They are divided, 1. Into Sacraments of the living and Sacraments of the dead; and 2. Into such as can be received only once, and such as can be received more than once.
? 13. Which are the Sacraments of the living?
The Sacraments of the living are, 1. Confirmation; 3. Holy Eucharist; 3. Extreme Unction; 4. Holy Orders; and 5. Matrimony.
? 14. Why are they called Sacraments of the 'living'?
Because, in order to receive them, we ought to have supernatural life — that is, sanctifying grace.
? 15. Which are the Sacraments of the dead?
The Sacraments of the dead are these two: Baptism and Penance.
'16. Why are they called Sacraments of the 'dead'?
Because, when we receive them, we either have not, or at least are not obliged to have, the life of grace.
? 17. Which Sacraments can be received only 'once'?
Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Orders.
? 18. Why can they be received but 'once'?
Because they imprint upon the soul an indelible character, or spiritual mark, which consecrates and dedicates him who receives it in a special manner to the service of God, remains for ever, and will add either to his glory in Heaven or to his misery in Hell.
? 19. Whence have we received those ceremonies which, in the administration of the Sacraments, are used together with the signs instituted by Christ?
From the Church, which, under the assistance of the Holy Ghost, has ordained them for the increase of our devotion and reverence.
Application. Esteem the Holy Sacraments as most precious means of grace instituted by Christ; give fervent thanks to God for them, and beware of profaning them by imprecations or by unworthily receiving them.
Baptism.
? 1. Which is the first and most necessary Sacrament?
The first and most necessary Sacrament is Baptism.
? 2. Why is Baptism the first Sacrament?
Because before Baptism no other Sacrament can be validly received.
? 3. Why is Baptism the most necessary Sacrament?
Because without Baptism no one can be saved.
'Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God' (John iii. 5).
God has not revealed to us what becomes of those children who die without Baptism. All we know is that they are not admitted to enjoy the sight or beatific vision of God, nor are they punished like those who have sinned of their own free will. However, it is to be supposed that their life hereafter is also to them a benefit of God.
? 4. What is Baptism?
Baptism is a Sacrament in which, by water and the word of God, we are cleansed from all sin, and re-born and sanctified in Christ to life everlasting.
? 5. Why do you say that we are baptized ' by water and the word of God '?
Because Baptism is administered by pouring water over the head or over the body of him who is baptized, and, at the same time, pronouncing these words: 'I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.'
? 6. Why do you say that ' in Baptism we are cleansed from all sin'?
Because in Baptism original sin. and all the sins committed before Baptism, are forgiven.
? 7. Is also the punishment due to sin remitted?
Yes; the temporal as well as the eternal punishment is remitted in Baptism.
? 8. Why are we, even after Baptism, still subject to some defects of original sin, as death, concupiscence, and many tribulations and infirmities?
1. That we ourselves may experience how punishable and pernicious sin is, and hate it so much the more; and 2. That we may increase our merits for Heaven by our combats and sufferings.
? 9. Why do you further say that we are ' re-born and sanctified to life everlasting '?
Because in Baptism we are not only cleansed from all sin, but are also transformed in a spiritual manner, made holy, children of God, and heirs of Heaven.
' He saved us by the laver of regeneration, and renovation of the Holy Ghost, whom He hath poured forth upon us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour; that, being justified by His grace, we may be his heirs, according to hope, of life everlasting' (Tit. iii. 5-7).
? 10. By what is this spiritual re-birth and sanctification effected?
It is effected by the grace of sanctification, which, together with the Theological Virtues of Faith, Hope, and Charity, the Holy Ghost infuses into the soul in Baptism.
' The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us' (Rom. v. 5).
? 11. And why do you say that we are re-born and sanctified ' in Christ '?
To signify that all these graces are given to us, be cause by Baptism we are united with Christ and incorporated into His Church.
'There is now, therefore, no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus' (Rom. viii. 1).
? 12. When did Christ give the commandment to baptize?
Before His Ascension, when He said to His Apostles: ' Going therefore, teach ye all nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost' (Matt, xxviii. 19).
? 13. Who can validly baptize?
Any person; but, except in cases of necessity, only priests, who have care of souls, are allowed to baptize.
? 14. Is the Baptism given by non-Catholics also valid?
Yes; it is valid, if they strictly observe in it all that is necessary for Baptism.
When heretics are converted, if it is found, after diligent examination, either that Baptism had not been conferred at all, or else conferred improperly, they must be baptized. If, upon investigation, there remains a reasonable doubt of the validity of their former Baptism, they must be baptized conditionally. If the former Baptism was valid they are not to be baptized again. There are three ways, therefore, of receiving converts into the Church.
I. If Baptism is conferred absolutely, neither abjuration nor absolution follows, since all the past is wiped out by Baptism.
II. If Baptism is repeated conditionally, the following order is to be observed, 1. The Abjuration, or Profession of Faith. 2. Conditional Baptism. 3. Sacramental Confession.
III. If the former Baptism is held to be valid, the Abjuration or Profession of Faith alone is to be made, followed by Absolution from Censures.
? 15. What sort of water should be used in Baptism?
Any natural water will do for the validity of Baptism. However, when possible, baptismal water, or water blessed for that purpose, should be used.
? 16. What intention must he have who baptizes?
He must have the intention to baptize indeed — that is, to do what the Church does, or what Christ has ordained.
? 17. What name should be given to the child in Baptism?
The name of some saint, in whom the child may have an intercessor with God, and an example for imitation.
? 18. Why must the person to be baptized renounce Satan, all his works, and all his pomps, before Baptism?
Because no one can belong to Christ, unless he renounce not only Satan, but also his works — i.e., sin — and his pomps — i.e., the spirit and the vanities of the world, by which Satan blinds men and entices them to sin (Matt. iv. 8, 9).
In Baptism we promise to believe, to avoid sin, and to lead a new life pleasing to God. On the other hand, God promises us His grace and eternal salvation. These mutual promises are called the Covenant of Baptism.
? 19. Why does the Priest place a white linen cloth upon our head in Baptism?
To remind us that we should preserve the innocence we have received pure and spotless until death; therefore, when he puts it on us, he says: 'Receive this white garment, and see thou carry it without stain before the judgment-seat of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou mayest have eternal life.'
? 20. What does the lighted candle, which is put into the child's hand after he is baptized, signify?
That a Christian ought to shine by his faith and virtuous life before the whole world.
'So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in Heaven' (Matt. V. 16).
The other ceremonies of Baptism are also very ancient, and have all a deep meaning. 1. The person to be baptized remains at first without the church, because only Baptism gives him entrance into it. 2. The Priest breathes three times in his face, to signify the new and spiritual life he receives by the grace of the Holy Ghost (Gen. ii. 7, and John xx. 22). 3. The sign of the Cross made upon his forehead and upon his breast denotes that he is becoming the property of his Crucified Redeemer, whose doctrine he is to carry in his heart, and to profess openly. 4. The blessed salt, which is put into his mouth, is an emblem of Christian wisdom, and of preservation from the corruption of sin. 5. By the exorcisms, which are repeated several times, the power of the devil, 'who has the empire of death' (Heb. ii. 14), is broken in the name of the Blessed Trinity, 6, The laying of the Priest's hand upon the person to be baptized signifies the protection of God; and the stole laid upon him, and his being led by it into the Church, is a sign of the ecclesiastical power, in virtue of which the Priest admits him into the Church. 7. The touching of the child's ears and nostrils with spittle, in imitation of our Saviour (Mark vii. 33), signifies that, by the grace of this Sacrament, his spiritual senses are opened to the doctrine of Christ. 8. After having renounced the devil and all his works, and all his pomps, he is anointed with holy oil on the breast and between the shoulders, because, as a champion of Christ, he has now manfully to fight against the devil and the world. 9. After the Baptism, the crown of the head is anointed with chrism, to intimate that he is now a Christian — i.e., an anointed of God, etc.
? 21. What should Sponsors, or Godfathers and Godmothers, be particularly mindful of?
Sponsors should bear in mind that they become, as it were, the spiritual parents of the infant that is baptized, and make in his name the profession of faith and the baptismal vows; that therefore —
1. They should be good Catholics themselves;
2. They should take care that the child be instructed in the Catholic religion, and well educated, if his natural parents should neglect their duty in this respect, or be prevented from performing it; and
3. That they cannot marry their Godchild; but they are not forbidden to marry each other.
? 22. How many Godfathers and Godmothers does the Church admit?
The Church generally admits but one Godfather for a boy, and one Godmother for a girl; or, at most, one Godfather and one Godmother for one person to be baptized. The others who may be admitted besides are only to be considered as witnesses of his Baptism, and, consequently, contract no spiritual relationship.
? 23. Can the Baptism of water never be supplied?
When it is impossible to have it, it may be supplied by the Baptism of desire or by the Baptism of blood.
? 24. What is the Baptism of desire?
An earnest wish and a determined will to receive Baptism, or to do all that God has ordained for our salvation, accompanied with a perfect contrition, or a pure love of God.
'Every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God' (1 John iv. 7).
? 25. What is the Baptism of blood?
Martyrdom for the sake of Christ.
'He that shall lose his life for me shall find it' (Matt. x. 39).
Application. Never forget what you owe to God for the inestimable grace of Baptism; and often, if possible every Sunday, renew your Baptismal Vows.
CONFIRMATION.
? 1. What is Confirmation?
Confirmation is a Sacrament in which, through the Bishop's laying on of hands, unction, and prayer, those already baptized are strengthened by the Holy Ghost, in order that they may steadfastly profess their faith, and faithfully live up to it.
? 2. Who teaches us that the Sacrament of Confirmation was instituted by Christ?
The infallible Catholic Church, in accordance with the Holy Scripture,1 with the doctrine of the holy Fathers,2 and with the practice of the most ancient times.3
The Holy Scripture reckons the doctrine of Confirmation, as well as that of Baptism and Penance, amongst the fundamental truths of Christianity (Hebr. vi. 1, 2). It testifies that Christ promised the Holy Ghost to the faithful, and that the Apostles imparted Him by prayer and imposition of hands. 'When the Apostles, who were in Jerusalem, had heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John. Who, when they were come, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost; for He was not as yet come upon any of them, but they were only baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; then they laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost' (Acts viii. 14-17). 'They [the disciples of Ephesus] were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; and when Paul had imposed his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied' (Acts xix. 5, 6). 2 The holy Fathers designate this Sacrament by various names; as Confirmation (i.e., strengthening). Imposition of hands, Sealing, Unction, Chrism, Mystery of the Holy Ghost 'The Sacrament of Chrism,' says St. Augustine, 'is just as holy as Baptism.' 3 History attests that even in the earliest days of the Church the Bishops travelled about to lay their hands on those that were baptized, and to call down the Holy Ghost upon them.
? 3. What are the effects of Confirmation?
1. Confirmation increases sanctifying grace in us; 2. It gives us the Holy Ghost, to enable us to fight against evil and to grow in virtue; and 3. It imprints on us, as soldiers of Christ, a spiritual mark which can never be effaced.
'He that confirmeth us with you in Christ, and that hath anointed us, is God: who also hath sealed us, and given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts' (2 Cor. i. 21, 22).
? 4. Who has power to confirm?
The Bishops, as Successors of the Apostles, have power to confirm; in urgent cases, however, the Pope can delegate this power also to a Priest who is not a Bishop.
? 5. How does the Bishop give Confirmation?
He extends his hands over all those who are to be confirmed, and prays for them all in general, that the Holy Ghost may come down upon them; then he lays his hand upon each one in particular, and anoints him with holy chrism; and he concludes by giving to all in common the Episcopal Benediction.
? 6. How does the Bishop anoint those to be confirmed?
He makes the sign of the Cross with holy chrism upon the forehead of each one, saying at the same time: 'N., I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.'
? 7. Of what does the chrism, blessed by the Bishop, consist?
Of oil of olives and balsam.
? 8. What does the oil signify?
The oil signifies the inward strength which we receive for the combat against the enemies of our salvation.
? 9. Why is fragrant balsam mixed with the oil?
To signify that he who is confirmed receives the grace to preserve himself from the corruption of the world, and to send forth by a pious life the sweet odor of virtue.
? 10. Why does the Bishop make the sign of the Cross on the forehead of him whom he confirms?
To intimate that a Christian never must be ashamed of the Cross, but boldly profess his faith in Jesus crucified.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth (Rom. i. 16).
? 11. Why does the Bishop, after he has anointed him, give him a slight blow on the cheek?
To remind him that, being now strengthened, he ought to be prepared to suffer patiently any kind of humiliation for the name of Jesus.
? 12. Is Confirmation necessary to salvation?
Confirmation is not absolutely necessary to salvation; yet it would be a sin not to receive it through neglect or indifference.
Whatever has been instituted by God for the sanctification of all must also ardently be desired, and thankfully accepted, by all.
? 13. Who is capable of receiving Confirmation?
Every one who is baptized.
? 14. How is a person to prepare himself for receiving the Sacrament of Confirmation?
1. He must cleanse his conscience at least from all grievous sins; 2. He must get himself well instructed in the fundamental truths of our faith, particularly in those which regard this Sacrament; and 3. He must heartily desire the grace of the Holy Ghost, and, for that purpose, he must fervently pray, and perform good works.
? 15. How are we to receive Confirmation?
We must, 1. Earnestly ask for the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; 2. Promise God that we will live, and die, as good Christians; and 3. Not leave the church before the Bishop has given his benediction.
? 16. What should we do after Confirmation?
We should, 1. Give humble thanks to God; 2. Spend that day especially in devotion; and 3. Preserve and increase the grace of the Holy Ghost by perseverance in our struggle against the enemies of salvation, and by an ardent zeal in all that is good.
? 17. Why are Sponsors, or Godfathers and Godmothers, required also in Confirmation?
That they may present to the Bishop those who are to be confirmed, and afterwards advise and help them in their spiritual combat for which they are consecrated in this Sacrament.
