Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter II: The Sacraments (3 of 6)
§ 3. On Holy Communion.
? 41. What is Holy Communion?
Holy Communion is truly the receiving of the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ for the nourishment of our souls.
Communion means, Union of the faithful with Christ and with one another; or, Common participation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. The Communion is also called the Lord's Supper, the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, of the Holy Eucharist, etc.
? 42. Was it God, or is it the Church only, that has commanded us to receive Holy Communion?
God has commanded it, and the Church also; for Christ our Lord says expressly: ' Amen, amen I say unto you: Except you eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink His Blood, you shall not have life in you ' (John vi. 54).
? 43. Must we also drink the Chalice, in order to receive the Blood of Christ?
No; for under the appearance of bread we receive also His Blood, since we receive Him whole and entire. His Humanity and His Divinity.
Therefore, Christ promises eternal life to those also who receive Him under the appearance of bread alone: ' If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world' (John vi. 52). This is the bread that came down from Heaven. Not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead. He that eateth this bread shall live for ever' (John vi. 59).
? 44. But why, then, did Christ institute the Holy Eucharist in both kinds?
Because He instituted it, not only as a Sacrament, but also as a Sacrifice, for which both kinds are required.
Accordingly, the words of Christ, 'Drink ye all of this' (Matt. xxvi. 27), are by no means a command to all the people, but only to the Apostles, and their Successors the Bishops and Priests, when they celebrate the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Therefore, Priests also, when they do not actually celebrate Mass, communicate under one kind only.
? 45. Why does the Catholic Church give Holy Communion to the faithful in one kind only — namely, under the form of bread?
1. To prevent the Sacred Blood from being profaned, since, under the appearance of wine, it might easily be spilled, and could not well be reserved;
2. To make it easy for all to receive the Blessed Sacrament, as many feel a disgust at drinking out of a common chalice; and
3. To declare thereby against the heretics that Christ is present whole and entire under each kind.
In the very first times of the primitive Church, the sick, prisoners, and all those who commnnicated at home, received the Blessed Sacrament only under the form of bread. Thus only the breaking of bread is mentioned by St. Luke, xxiv. 30: 'Whilst He was at table with them, He took bread, and blessed and brake, and gave to them '; and in the Acts, ii. 42: ' And they were persevering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in the communication of the breaking of bread, and in prayers' (comp. Acts ii. 46). Subsequently, it is true, Pope Leo and Pope Gelasius commanded the chalice to be received by the faithful in the public Communion, but only in order to combat the erroneous doctrine of the Manicheans, who detested wine as something diabolical, and to prevent these heretics from approaching with the Catholics to Communion. But this was only for a time and to meet an emergency. When that heresy disappeared, the faithful could return to the ancient and general usage.
? 46. Why does our Lord communicate Himself to all the faithful as food?
1. To give us a proof of His tender superabundant love, and to unite Himself most intimately with us: 'He that eateth my Flesh, and drinketh my Blood, abideth in me, and I in him ' (John vi. 57); and
2. To unite us also most closely together with one another by a bond of love and concord: 'For we, being many, are one bread, one body, all that partake of one bread' (1 Cor. x. 17).
? 47. What graces does Holy Communion impart to our souls?
By uniting us in the most intimate manner with Jesus Christ, the Source of all Divine graces, it imparts to us innumerable graces, especially these:
1. It preserves and increases sanctifying grace;
2. It weakens our evil inclinations, and gives us a desire and strength to be virtuous;
3. It cleanses us from venial and preserves us from mortal sin; and
4. It is to us a pledge of our future resurrection and everlasting happiness (John vi. 55).
? 48. Does every one receive in Holy Communion the graces it is intended to give?
No; he who receives Holy Communion unworthily — that is, in the state of mortal sin — brings damnation upon himself.
'Whosoever shall eat this Bread or drink the Chalice of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and of the Blood of the Lord. But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of the Chalice; for he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the Body of the Lord' (1 Cor. xi. 27-29). — Comparison with the Ark of the Covenant, which brought happiness and blessing upon the pious Israelites, but misfortune and a curse upon the impious Philistines.
? 49. What sin does he commit who dares to communicate unworthily?
1. He commits, like Judas, a horrible sacrilege, because he is guilty of the Body and of the Blood of the Lord (1 Cor. xi. 27); and
2. He renders himself guilty of the blackest ingratitude, because he treats his Divine Redeemer with the foulest indignity in the very same instant in which he is favored by Him with the greatest proof of His immense love (Ps. liv. 13).
? 50. What are frequently the consequences of an unworthy Communion, even in this life?
Blindness and hardness of heart, and sometimes also sudden death, and other temporal punishment.
Example: Miserable end of Judas, of whom our Saviour said: ' It were better for him, if that man had not been born ' (Matt. xxvi. 24). And of such St. Paul says: 'Therefore [on account of unworthily receiving], are there many infirm and weak among you, and many sleep' [the sleep of death] (1 Cor. xi. 30).
? 51. What, then, must we do when we have committed a grievous sin?
We must make a good confession before we receive. 'Let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of the Chalice' (1 Cor. xi. 28).
? 52. How must we further prepare ourselves, as to the 'soul'?
We must endeavor, 1. To cleanse our souls also from venial sin; and 2. To excite in our hearts sentiments of fervor and devotion.
? 53. Does venial sin also render our Communions unworthy?
Venial sin does not render them unworthy or sacrilegious, but it diminishes the graces which they otherwise would produce.
? 54. How can we excite sentiments of fervor and devotion in our heart?
By pious meditations and devout exercises.
? 55. Which are the best exercises before Holy Communion?
The Acts, 1. Of Faith and Adoration; 2. Of Humility and Contrition; and 3. Of Hope, Love, and an ardent Desire.
? 56. How do you make an 'Act of Faith'?
O my Jesus, I firmly believe all that Thou hast revealed, but especially that Thou art really present in this Most Holy Sacrament, because Thou, the eternal and infallible Truth, hast declared it.
? 57. How do you make an ' Act of Adoration '?
O my Jesus, in union with all the Angels and Saints I adore Thee in this Most Holy Sacrament, in which Thou art concealed for the love of me; I adore Thee as my Lord and my God, my Creator and my Redeemer.
? 58. How do you make an ' Act of Contrition '?
O my Jesus, I am most heartily sorry for all my sins, because by them I have provoked and offended Thee, my most bountiful God, whom I love above all things.
? 59. How do you make an ' Act of Humility '?
My Lord and my Saviour, how dare I approach Thee after having so often offended Thee! Indeed, I am not worthy to receive Thee into my heart; but only say the word, and my soul shall be healed.
? 60. How do you make an ' Act of Hope '?
Yes, my most amiable Jesus, Thy mercy is unbounded! Thou vouchsafest to come to me, and to dwell in my heart; so Thou wilt also, I confidently hope, sanctify me, and replenish me with Thy grace.
? 61. How do you make an 'Act of Love'?
O my Jesus, Thou hast loved me unto the death of the Cross, and, for the love of me, Thou wilt now become also the food of my soul. Oh! what return can I make for Thy love? In life and in death I will love Thee, and none but Thee.
? 62. How do you make an 'Act of Desire'?
Come, Jesus, come and take possession of my heart; make it entirely Thine own. Come, my Jesus, come and visit me, and strengthen me with Thy grace.
? 63. How must we prepare ourselves as to the 'body'?
1. We must be fasting; that is, from twelve o'clock the night before we must not have taken even the least thing by way of eating or drinking;1 and
2. We must be decently dressed.
1 The Church commands this under pain of a grievous sin, in order to prevent great abuses that would follow from the disregard of this law.
? 64. Who are dispensed from this command to receive fasting?
Those who are dangerously ill, and receive the Blessed Sacrament by way of Viaticum — i.e., as a preparation for their passage into eternity.
The Holy See grants to invalids, even though not dangerously ill, permission to take some liquid food after midnight before going to Communion, with the approval of their Confessor, provided that they have been laid up at least a month, and that they have no definite hope of a speedy recovery. They may thus receive once or twice a week as long as their illness lasts.
? 65. How should we approach the altar-rail, in order to receive Holy Communion?
With the greatest reverence, with hands joined and raised, and eyes cast down.
? 66. What should we do at the time of our receiving the Sacred Host?
We should spread the communion-cloth over our hands and under our chin, hold the head erect and firm, extend the tongue a little upon the under lip, and then most reverently receive the Sacred Host.
Do not keep the Sacred Host in your mouth until it is quite dissolved; but let it moisten a little upon your tongue, and then swallow it. Should it stick to the roof of your mouth, remove it with your tongue, and not with your finger. Gloves should not be worn.
? 67. What must we do after receiving Holy Communion?
We must retire with the greatest modesty to our place, and spend some time in devout prayer.
No time is more precious and more favorable for obtaining graces than that which immediately follows Holy Communion; therefore we should avail ourselves of it in the best manner we can. It is, indeed, a bad sign if we cannot, in meditation and prayer, entertain ourselves for half an hour, or at least for fifteen minutes, with our dear Redeemer.
? 68. What sort of prayers ought we especially to say after Holy Communion?
Those in which we humble ourselves before the Lord, thank Him, offer ourselves up to Him, express our love, and implore His graces.
? 69. In what manner may we say these prayers?
We may say them in the following manner:
AN ACT OF HUMILITY.
O my Jesus, whence is this to me that Thou, my God, shouldst have vouchsafed to come to me, a poor sinner!
AN ACT OF THANKSGIVING AND OBLATION.
Most amiable Jesus, what return can I make to Thee for all that Thou hast done for me? I offer to Thee my body, and my soul, and all that I possess. All my thoughts, my desires, my words, and all that I do, shall be Thine, shall be for Thee.
AN ACT OF LOVE.
O Jesus, inflame my cold heart with the fire of Thy love, in order that I may love Thee more than all things, more than myself.
AN ACT OF PETITION.
O my Lord and my God, grant me, a poor creature, all the graces I stand in need of; for Thou art, indeed, infinitely rich and infinitely good.
O most bountiful Jesus, remain within me with Thy grace; strengthen and bless me by the virtue. of this Holy Sacrament, now and at the hour of my death. Amen.
? 70. How should we spend the day of Communion?
We should spend it, as much as possible, in pious exercises, and avoid worldly recreations and amusements.
Application. Consider how the Lord pours forth, in the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar, the treasures of His Divine Love for mankind; and resolve, therefore, to approach to the Holy Table as often as you can with permission, and to receive the Bread of Angels with as much devotion and purity of heart as you can possibly attain to.
Penance.
? 1. What is understood by Penance?
By Penance is understood, 1. The Virtue or disposition of heart by which man repents of his sins and is converted to God; 2. The Punishment by which he atones for the sins committed; and 3. The Sacrament of Penance.
? 2. What is the Sacrament of Penance?
It is a Sacrament in which the Priest, in the place of God, forgives sins, when the sinner is heartily sorry for them, sincerely confesses them, and is willing to perform the penance imposed upon him.
? 3. Does the Priest truly forgive the sins, or does he only declare that they are remitted?
The Priest does really and truly forgive the sins in virtue of the power given to him by Christ.
? 4. When did Christ give the power to forgive sins?
When after His resurrection He breathed on the Apostles, and said to them: 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained' (John XX. 22, 23).
? 5. Did not Christ impart this power to the Apostles alone?
No; He imparted it also to all those who were to suc- ceed the Apostles in the Priesthood, as the Church has always believed and taught.
? 6. Why was the power of forgiving sins to pass from the Apostles to their Successors also?
Because Christ instituted His means of salvation for all times, and for all men, who stand in need of them.
? 7. Can all sins be forgiven by the Sacrament of Penance?
Yes, all the sins we have committed after Baptism can be forgiven, if we confess them with the necessary disposition of repentance.
'If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity' (1 John i. 9).
Yet not all sins can be forgiven by every Priest. For, 1. In order that a Priest may be able to absolve validly from sins, it is not only required that he should have received this power in Holy Order, but also that he should have been especially authorized by the Bishop to administer the Sacrament of Penance in his diocese. 2. According to an ancient, lawful, and salutary practice, the Pope and the Bishops are accustomed to reserve to themselves the absolution from certain very grievous sins, from which, therefore, other Priests can absolve only in virtue of a particular authorization. When, however, there is immediate danger of death, and no Priest especially authorized to hear Confessions is present, any other Priest can absolve from all sins.
? 8. But why must we confess our sins in order to have them forgiven?
Because Christ ordained it so when He instituted the Sacrament of Penance.
? 9. How do we prove that Christ has ordained Confession?
We prove it, 1. By his own words: ' Whose sins you shall forgive,' etc., for unless we declare our sins, and the whole state of our soul, to the Priest, he cannot know whether, in virtue of the judicial power which God has conferred on him, he is to forgive or to retain them;
2. By the testimony of the holy Fathers of the Church, who unanimously teach that we have not to expect from God forgiveness of our sins, if we are ashamed to confess them to the Priest; 1 and
3. By the existence of confession in the Church at all times and among all nations; for if Confession had been instituted by human laws, and not by Christ Himself, people would certainly never have generally complied with it.2
1' Whosoever is ashamed to declare his sins to man, and will not confess them, he shall be confounded in the day of judgment in the face of the Avhole world' (St. John Chrysostom). 'If the sick man is ashamed to discover the wounds of his soul to the physician, he cannot be cured' (St. Jerome). Thus likewise Origen, St. Cyprian, St. Basil, St. Pacian, St. John Climacus, St. Gregory the Great, and others. 2 That Confession was practised as early as in the times of the Apostles, is proved by tradition; and even the Holy Scripture testifies (Acts xix. 18) that, when the Apostle St. Paul was at Ephesus, ' Many of them that believed came confessing and declaring their deeds, '
? 10. But to receive forgiveness of our sins is it not sufficient to confess them to God alone?
By no means; or else the full power which Christ gave to the Priests, of retaining or remitting them according to their judgment, would, indeed, be vain and useless.
'Confess your sins one to another [not, then, to God alone], that you may be saved' (James v. 16). 'Let no one say: I do penance privately before God; God, who knows me, sees what is going on in my heart. Was it, then, said in vain: Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in Heaven? Were, then, the keys given in vain to the Church of God?' (St. Augustine.)
? 11. Is, then, the Sacrament of Penance necessary for salvation to all those who have sinned?
It is necessary for salvation to all those who have committed a grievous sin after Baptism.
? 12. Can the Sacrament of Penance never be supplied?
When the Sacrament of Penance cannot be received, it can be supplied by a perfect Contrition, and a firm resolution to confess our sins as soon as an opportunity offers.
? 13. What are the effects of the Sacrament of Penance?
1. It remits the guilt of sins committed after Baptism;
2. It remits the eternal, and at least a part of the temporal, punishment due to our sins;
3. It restores, or, if it is not lost, it increases, sanctifying grace; and
4. It also confers other particular graces to enable us to lead a holy life.
? 14. How many things are required on our part, in order to receive the Sacrament of Penance worthily?
These five: 1. Examination of Conscience; 2. Contrition; 3. Resolution of Amendment; 4. Confession; and 5. Satisfaction.
§ 1. The Examination of Conscience.
? 15. What is meant by 'examining our conscience'?
To examine our conscience means to meditate seriously "upon our sins, in order that we may know them well.
? 16. How must we begin the Examination of Conscience?
By imploring the assistance of the Holy Ghost, that He may give us the grace rightly to know, to repent, and to confess our sins.
? 17. How do we implore the assistance of the Holy Ghost?
Come, Holy Ghost, enlighten my understanding, that I may rightly know my sins; and move my hearty that I may properly repent of them, sincerely confess them, and truly amend my life.
? 18. In what manner should we examine our conscience?
1. We should examine when it was that we last made a good Confession, and whether we perform.ed the penance then laid upon us; and
2. We should go through the Commandments of God and of the Church, and through the obligations of our state of life, and also through the different kinds of sin, carefully examining in what way and how often we have offended God by thoughts, words, actions, and omissions.
? 19. Must we also examine ourselves on the number and the circumstances of our sins?
Yes; at least, when they are mortal.
? 20. Against what faults are we to guard in the Examination of Conscience?
1. We must not examine ourselves too hastily and superficially; 2. We must not conceal our favorite sins from ourselves; 3. We must not take all that to be trifling which the world considers as such; but we should place ourselves in spirit before the tribunal of God; 4. On the other hand, we must avoid becoming too scrupulous.
? 21. How much time ought we to employ in the Examination of Conscience?
The more carelessly we have lived, and the longer we have stayed from Confession, the more time and diligence ought we to employ in examining ourselves.
? 22. How can we facilitate this examination?
By examining our conscience every day, and by going frequently to Confession.
§ 2. On Contrition.
? 23. What is Contrition?
Contrition is a hearty sorrow for our sins, and a detestation of them.
? 24. What qualities must Contrition have, that our sins may be forgiven?
These three: It must be, 1. Interior; 2. Universal; and 3. Supernatural.
? 25. How must Contrition be 'interior'?
We must not grieve merely in words for our sins, but we must also detest them in our hearts as the greatest evil, and sincerely wish we had not committed them.
'Rend your hearts, and not your garments' (Joel ii. 13). ' A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit; a contrite and humbled heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise' (Ps. 1. 19).
? 26. How must Contrition be ' universal'?
We must be sorry for all the sins we have committed, or, at least, for all mortal sins.
? 27. If a penitent has no sorrow for his venial sins, would his Confession nevertheless be valid?
If he has to confess venial sins only, and is not truly sorry for any one of them, his Confession is null.
If since our last Confession we have to accuse ourselves of venial sins only, and, because they do not seem to be grievous, we doubt whether we have sufficient Contrition for them, it is advisable to repent again of some grievous sin of our former life, which we have already confessed, and to include it in our Confession, saying at the end of it: ' For these, and all my other sins which I cannot at present call to my remembrance, and also for the sins of my past life, especially for ... I am heartily sorry,' etc. This should also be done when we are not quite certain whether we have committed any sin since the last Confession.
