Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter II: The Sacraments (4 of 6)
? 28. How must Contrition be ' supernatural '?
The sorrow for our sins must arise not from the consideration of their natural evil consequences, but from supernatural motives; namely, because we have offended God, lost his grace, deserved hell, etc.
? 29. Would it not, then, be sufficient to be sorry for our sins on account of the temporal loss incurred by them?
To be sorry for our sins only because we have lost by them our health, property, reputation, etc., is nothing but a natural sorrow, which is of no avail for everlasting life.
Thus the sorrow of King Saul, Antiochus, and others was a merely natural sorrow; on the contrary, that of King David, Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, the Apostles Peter and Paul, and other Scripture penitents, was supernatural.
? 30. What should we do in order to obtain supernatural Contrition?
We should, 1. Earnestly ask God for His grace; and 2. We should seriously call to our mind what Faith teaches us concerning the malice of sin, and its fatal consequences; for supernatural Contrition must proceed from grace and motives of Faith.
? 31. Why must Contrition proceed from motives of Faith?
1. Because Faith is the foundation and root of all Justification; and 2. Because, otherwise. Contrition does not prompt us to renounce evil entirely and for ever, but only inasmuch as we have to dread temporal losses.
? 32. How many kinds of supernatural Contrition are there?
Two: Perfect Contrition and Imperfect Contrition, commonly called Attrition.
? 33. When is Contrition 'Perfect'?
When it arises from Perfect Love; i.e., when we detest sin more than all other evils, for the reason that it offends God, the Supreme Good,
Since Perfect Contrition proceeds from Perfect Love, in order to excite ourselves to Perfect Contrition it is very profitable, previously, or at the same time, to excite ourselves to Perfect Love of God.
? 34. When is Contrition ' Imperfect '?
When our Love is not Perfect, and when, therefore, our fear of Hell and of the loss of Heaven, or our sense of the heinousness of sin itself, must unite with it in causing us to detest sin above all other evils, and to resolve to offend God no more.
Perfect Contrition is, therefore, a sorrow for sin arising from the Perfect Love of God; Imperfect Contrition is, on the contrary, a sorrow for sin arising from any other motive which, though good and supernatural, is not perfect. In order to excite ourselves to Perfect Contrition, let us consider how much God deserves to be loved by us, on account of His infinite good ness — i.e., on account of that perfection which He, as the Sovereign Good, possesses; and how, nevertheless, we have despised and insulted Him, our most loveable Father; how we have expelled Him from our heart, and renounced His love and friendship for ever. In order to excite ourselves to Imperfect Contrition, let us consider how terrible are the pains of Hell or of Purgatory, which we have deserved; how beautiful Heaven, which we have lost; how detestable sin, which nailed the Son of God to the Cross, has deprived our soul of grace, disfigured it, rendered it foul and execrable before God and His Angels, etc.; and let us, therefore, repent of the offence given to God, and detest it more than any other evil in the world.
? 35. Must Contrition necessarily be perfect?
It is not necessary for the remission of sins that we should have Perfect Contrition; we should, however, strive to obtain it.
? 36. Why should we strive to obtain Perfect Contrition?
Because the more Perfect our Contrition is, the more is our repentance meritorious and acceptable to God, and the more certainly it obtains our pardon.
? 37. When should we make an Act of Perfect Contrition, even ' without' the Sacrament of Penance?
1. In danger of death; and 2. As often as we have the misfortune to commit a mortal sin and cannot immediately go to Confession.
? 38. When must we make the Act of Contrition 'in' the Sacrament of Penance?
We must make it before our Confession, or, at least, when the Priest gives us Absolution.
? 39. Can Contrition ever be supplied in case of necessity?
No; Contrition is so necessary that it cannot be supplied by anything or in any case.
§ 3. The Resolution of Amendment.
? 40. What must Contrition necessarily include?
Contrition must necessarily include, 1. Hope of pardon; and 2. Resolution of Amendment.
? 41. What is a Resolution of Amendment?
A Resolution of Amendment is a sincere determination to amend our life and to sin no more.
? 42. What must be the qualities of our Resolution of Amendment?
Our Resolution of Amendment must be, like our Contrition, 1. Interior or Sincere; 2. Universal; and 3. Supernatural.
? 43. What must he be determined to do who forms a firm and sincere Resolution of Amendment?
He must be determined,
1. To avoid, at least, all grievous sins, so that he will suffer anything rather than commit even one;
2. To shun the danger, and especially the proximate occasion, of sin;
3. To use the necessary means of amendment;
4. To make due satisfaction for his sins; and
5. To repair whatever injury he may have done to his neighbor.
? 44. What is meant by the proximate occasion of sin?
By the proximate occasion of sin is meant a person, a company, an amusement, and such like, by which people usually have been, or, if they do not avoid them, probably will be, led into sin.
? 45. Is it a strict duty to shun the proximate occasions of sin?
Yes, whenever it is possible; for he who will not avoid the occasion of sin has not a sincere purpose to avoid sin itself.
? 46. What ought they to consider who will not avoid the proximate occasion, or will not desist from their habitual sins?
That the Priest's Absolution is of no avail to them, but only aggravates their guilt.
? 47. How can we make an act of Imperfect and Perfect Contrition, together with a Resolution of Amendment?
In this manner:
my God! I am heartily sorry for having offended Thee, and I detest all my sins, because I dread the loss of heaven and the pains of hell, but most of all because they offend Thee, my God, who art all-good and deserving of all my love. I firmly resolve, with the help of Thy grace, to confess my sins, to do penance, and to amend my life. Amen.
§ 4. Confession.
? 48. What is Confession?
Confession is a sorrowful declaration of our sins to a Priest, in order to obtain Absolution from him.
? 49. What are the necessary Qualities of Confession?
Confession must be, 1. Entire; 2. Sincere; and 3. Clear.
? 50. When is Confession ' entire '?
When we confess, at least, all grievous sins which we remember, together with their number and necessary circumstances.
? 51. But what must we do, if we do not recollect the number rightly?
We must declare it as well as we are able, and say, for instance: I have committed this sin about .... times a day, week, or month.
? 52. What sort of circumstances must we confess?
We must, 1. Especially confess such circumstances as change the nature, or aggravate the guilt, of our sins; and 2. Mention in general everything by which the Confessor may be enabled to judge rightly of the state of our conscience, and to put us on our guard against relapsing into sin.
1. Should a person have stolen Church property, wished his parents dead, coveted his neighbor's wife, injured some one by telling a lie, etc., it would not be sufficient for him to confess merely that he has stolen, wished some persons dead, had an evil desire, told a lie. 2. Therefore, we must also declare whether we have injured our neighbors much or little, knowingly or unknowingly; whether the occasion of sin still continues; whether we have often before confessed the evil habit, and never corrected it.
? 53. What is to be observed in the declaration of the circumstances?
We must avoid making known any person who may be concerned in our sins; we must refrain from all superfluous narrations, and must express ourselves in as modest and decent a manner as the nature of the sin allows.
? 54. Must we also confess venial sins?
We are not, indeed, obliged to confess venial sins; yet it is good and wholesome to do so.
? 55. But if we do not know whether something is a mortal or a venial sin, what are we to do?
We are to confess it, because many people mistake mortal sins for venial ones.
? 56. When is Confession 'sincere'?
When we accuse ourselves just as we sincerely believe ourselves guilty before God, without concealing or disguising anything, or excusing it by vain pretences.
? 57. What should the penitent consider, if he is ashamed to make a sincere Confession?
He should consider, 1. That a Confession which is not sincere procures him neither remission of sins nor peace of conscience; but that the Confession, as well as the Communion which follows it, is another grievous sin — a sacrilege — and deserves eternal damnation; and
2. That it is much better for him to confess his sins to one Priest, bound by secrecy, than to live always uneasy in sin, to die unhappy for ever, and to be put to shame at the last day before the whole world.
As the Confessor is bound to suffer even martyrdom rather than reveal anything heard in Confession, so is every one else, who may have accidentally overheard any part of a Confession, bound to the strictest secrecy.
? 58. What must we do if we have omitted something in Confession which we were obliged to declare?
1. If we have omitted it without our fault, it is only required to mention it in the next Confession; but
2. If we have omitted it, either because we were ashamed to confess it or because we did not sufficiently examine our conscience, we must also say in how many Confessions we have omitted it through our fault, and repeat them all.
? 59. When is Confession ' clear '?
When we so express ourselves that the Confessor can understand everything well, and clearly see the state of our conscience.
? 60. Would our Confession be clear if we accused ourselves in general only? — for example, that we have not loved God, that we have thought or spoken evil?
By no means; we must distinctly name and specify the different sins.
? 61. What is a 'General Confession'?
A General Confession is that in which we repeat all or some of our former Confessions.
? 62. When is a general Confession necessary?
As often as our former Confessions were sacrilegious, either through want of sincerity, or of sorrow and resolution, or through a culpable negligence in the examination of our conscience.
? 63. When principally is a general Confession useful and advisable?
1. As a preparation for first Communion; 2. On entering on a state of life; 3. In dangerous illness; 4, At the time of a Jubilee, a Mission, etc.
? 64. How do you begin your Confession?
Having made the sign of the Cross, I say: ' I, a poor and miserable sinner, accuse myself to God, the Almighty, and to you, my Father, in His stead, that since my last Confession, which was ... I have committed the following sins.' (Here I confess my sins.)
Or in the following manner:
Having arrived at the Confessional, I kneel down, make the sign of the Cross, and ask the Priest's blessing by saying: ' Bless me. Father, for I have sinned.' After receiving his blessing, I say the first part of the Confiteor as far as through my most grievous fault.' Then I say how long it is since my last Confession, whether I then received Absolution and performed my Penance. After this I confess all the sins I can recollect, beginning with those which I may have forgotten in my last Confession.
? 65. How do you finish your Confession?
In conclusion, I say: 'For these, and all the sins of my whole life, I am most heartily sorry, because by them I have offended God, the Supreme and Most Amiable Good. I detest all my sins, and am firmly resolved to amend my life, and to sin no more. I humbly ask Penance and Absolution of you, my Ghostly Father.'
Or I conclude by saying: ' For these, and all my other sins which I cannot at present call to my remembrance, and also for the sins of my past life, especially for . . .' (see p. 284, quest. 27, note), ' I am heartily sorry, purpose amendment for the future, and most humbly ask pardon of God, and Penance and Absolution of you, my Ghostly Father.' Here I finish the Confiteor: 'Therefore I beseech the Blessed Mary ever Virgin,' etc.
? 66. What should we do after this?
We should listen with attention to the instruction which the Confessor may think proper to give, and to the Penance he enjoins; and when he asks us questions, we should answer them with sincerity and humility.
Take care not to leave the Confessional before the Priest has given you notice, by saying, for instance: 'Go in peace'; or, 'May God Almighty bless you!' or something similar.
? 67. What are we to do if we should not receive Absolution?
We should humbly submit to the decision of the Confessor, and, by true amendment, render ourselves worthy of it.
§ 5. Satisfaction.
? 68. What is Satisfaction in the Sacrament of Penance?
It is the performance of the Penance enjoined by the Confessor.
? 69. For what purpose does the Confessor impose a Penance on us?
1. For the expiation of the temporal punishment of sin; and
2. For the amendment of our life.
? 70. When God remits the sin, does He also remit all punishment due on account of it?
With the sin God always remits the eternal punishment, but He does not always remit the temporal punishment due for it; therefore the Prophet Nathan said to David: 'The Lord hath taken away thy sin; nevertheless, the child that is born to thee shall surely die ' (2 Kings xii. 13, 14).
? 71. What is the temporal punishment due to our sins?
It is that punishment which we have to suffer either here on earth, or in Purgatory.
? 72. Why does God not always remit the temporal punishment together with the eternal?
1. Because His Justice demands that, by the' enduring of the punishment, we should make some reparation for the injury done to Him; and
2. Because in His Mercy He will, by the fear of such punishment, render us more cautious, and guard us against relapsing into sin.
? 73. Has not Christ, then, made full satisfaction for our sins?
Yes, Christ has abundantly satisfied for our sins; nevertheless. He requires that we also, in union with Him, should make satisfaction; just as He has prayed for us, and nevertheless requires that we also should pray in order to be saved.
'I fill up those things that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ' (Col. i. 24). 'If we suffer with Him, we shall be also glorified with Him' (Rom. viii. 17),
? 74. From whom has the Priest the power to impose works of Penance?
From Jesus Christ, who gave to His Church the power, not only to loose, but also to bind (Matt, xviii. 18).
? 75. Is the Confession invalid, if the penitent does not perform the Penance enjoined?
If after Confession, through his own fault, he does not perform the Penance which in Confession he was willing and sincerely intended to perform, the Confession is not rendered invalid; but he commits a new sin, and deprives himself of many graces.
? 76. When should we comply with the Penance enjoined?
If the Confessor has fixed no time for it, the best way is to comply with it directly, and before we have fallen again into any grievous sin.
? 77. What should we do if the Penance seems to be too severe?
We should consider how light the present Penances are in comparison with the ancient Canonical Penances, and with the eternal punishment we have deserved; but if we should really be unable to do the Penance, we should respectfully mention it to the Confessor.
? 78. Should we perform that Penance only which the Confessor lays upon us?
We should also endeavor to satisfy the Divine Justice by other voluntary penitential works, and by patience in our sufferings.
? 79. What shall we have to expect, if we neglect to make due satisfaction to the Divine Justice?
We shall have so much the more to suffer in Purgatory, and that without any merit for Heaven.
? 80. Are we, after Confession, under no other obligation than to satisfy the Divine Justice?
We are also obliged,
1. To repair to the utmost of our power, the scandal we have given and the injury we have unjustly done to our neighbor; and
2. To employ the means necessary not to relapse into sin, and to amend our life.
1. Example of Zacheus: ' Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have wronged any man of anything, I restore him fourfold' (Luke xix, 8). 2. 'Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest some worse thing happen to thee' (John v. 14).
? 81. What should they think, who always relapse into their former grievous sins?
That their Confessions are much to be suspected, and that their state is extremely dangerous.
'When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man ... he goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and entering in they dwell there; and the last state of that man becomes worse than the first' (Luke xi. 26).
? 82. What means should we especially use in order that we may not relapse into sin?
We should, 1. Strictly follow the instructions and directions of our Confessor; 2. Carefully avoid the occasions of sin; 3. Daily examine our conscience; 4. Be assiduous in praying, in hearing the word of God, and receiving the Sacraments of Penance and of the Holy Eucharist; and 5. We should often meditate on the Four Last Things of man.
Application. When you have sinned, go to Confession without delay, but never without a diligent Examination of Conscience, a true Contrition, a firm Resolution of Amendment, and a sincere declaration of your sins; that the Sacrament of Penance, so replete with grace, may not become for you a source of eternal perdition.
§ 6. Indulgences.
? 83. By what means does the Church assist us in the discharge of the temporal punishment due to our sins?
By the grant of Indulgences.
? 84. What is an ' Indulgence '?
An Indulgence is a remission, granted out of the Sacrament of Penance, of that temporal punishment which, even after the sin is forgiven, we have yet to undergo, either here or in Purgatory.
? 85. How does the Church remit the punishment due to our sins?
By making to the Divine Justice compensation for us from the inexhaustible treasure of the merits of Christ and His Saints.
Indulgences, therefore, derive their value and efficacy from the spiritual treasure of the Church, which consists of the superabundant merits and satisfactions of Christ and the Saints. This treasure is to be considered as the common property of the faithful, committed to the administration of the Church; since, by virtue of the Communion of Saints by which we are united as members of one body, the abundance of some supplies the want of others.
'In this present time, let your abundance supply their want, that their abundance also may supply your want, that there may be an equality' (2 Cor. viii. 14).
? 86. What is generally required to gain an Indulgence?
It is required, 1. That we should be in the state of grace, and have already obtained, by true repentance, forgiveness of those sins the temporal punishment of which is to be remitted by the Indulgence; and 2. That we should exactly perform the good works prescribed for the gaining of the Indulgence.
? 87. What must we believe with regard to Indulgences?
We must believe,
1. That the Catholic Church has power to grant Indulgences; and
2. That the use of them is very salutary to us (Council of Trent, Sess. XXV).
? 88. From whom has the Catholic Church the power of granting Indulgences?
From Jesus Christ, who made no exception when He said: 'Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in Heaven ' (Matt. xvi. 19; xviii. 18).
That the Catholic Church has from the earliest times exercised this full power, is evident even from. 2 Cor. ii. 10.
? 89. Who has a right to grant Indulgences?
This right belongs especially to our Most Holy Father the Pope, who, being the successor of St. Peter, has received from Christ the keys of the kingdom of Heaven; the Bishops, however, have also the power of granting some Partial Indulgences.
? 90. For what reasons are Indulgences very salutary to us?
For these:
1. They discharge our debt of temporal punishment.
2. They encourage us to make our peace with God, by substituting easier exercises of piety for the very severe Canonical Penances of the ancient Church.
3. They incite us to true repentance and amendment, since without these requisites they cannot be gained at all.
4. They urge us to receive frequently the Sacraments of Penance and of the Holy Eucharist, and to perform good works.
5. They console fervent penitents in their fear of the judgments of God.
To assert that, by an Indulgence, the Church forgives sins, past or future, or that she grants indulgences for money, is a gross calumny. It is true that, when granting an Indulgence, she has sometimes, besides the conditions of a sincere repentance, prescribed alms-deeds for charitable purposes; for instance, for the building of a church or of an hospital; but as this, laudable as it was in the beginning, gave nevertheless, in the course of time, occasion to abuses, the Council of Trent abolished the abuses, declaring, however, that 'the use of Indulgences is very salutary to Christian people, and approved of by the authority of the Sacred Councils' (Sess. 25).
