Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter II: The Sacraments (5 of 6)
? 91. Is it, then, not true that the Church, by Indulgences, frees us from the obligation of doing Penance?
No; she does not free us from the obligation of doing Penance according to our capacity, since, the greater is our penitential zeal and love to God, the more do we participate in the Indulgence; she will only assist us in our inability to expiate all temporal punishment in this life, and thus, by a generous Indulgence, effect what, in ancient times, she endeavored to attain by the rigorous Penitential Canons.
? 92. How many kinds of Indulgences are there?
There are two kinds: A Plenary Indulgence, which is the remission of the whole debt of temporal punishment due to sin; and a Partial Indulgence, which is the remission of a part of it only.
? 93. What is meant by an Indulgence of forty days or seven years?
A remission of such a debt of temporal punishment as a person would discharge if he did penance for forty days or seven years, according to the ancient Canons of the Church.
? 94. What is meant by a ' Jubilee '?
A Jubilee is a Plenary Indulgence which the Holy Father grants every twenty-fifth year, or upon extraordinary occasions; during which time, in order to increase the fervor of repentance in the faithful, Confessors have a special power to commute private vows into other works of piety, and to absolve in reserved cases.
? 95. Can Indulgences also be gained for the benefit of the souls in Purgatory?
Yes, all those which the Pope has expressly declared to be applicable to them.
Application. Value and esteem Indulgences, and avail yourself of every opportunity of gaining them worthily for yourself, as well as for the souls of the faithful departed.
Extreme Unction.
? 1. What is Extreme Unction?
Extreme Unction is a Sacrament in which the sick, by the anointing with holy oil, and by the prayer of the Priest, receive the grace of God for the good of their souls, and often also of their bodies.
This Sacrament is called Extreme Unction, because it is usually the last of the holy unctions which are administered by the Church.
? 2. Whence do we know that the Sacrament of Extreme Unction was instituted by Christ?
We know this, 1. From the Holy Scripture; and 2. From the constant doctrine of the Church.
? 3. What does Holy Scripture say of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction?
The Apostle St. James says in his Epistle (v. 14, 15): ' Is any man sick among you, let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick man, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him.'
? 4. Why do we infer from these words that Christ has instituted Extreme Unction?
Because the anointing with oil could have no Sacramental power of forgiving sins, if Christ had not so ordained it.
? 5. How is Extreme Unction administered?
The Priest anoints the different senses of the sick person with holy oil, and uses, at each anointing, this form of prayer: ' Through this holy unction, and His most tender mercy, may the Lord forgive thee whatever sins thou hast committed by thy sight ' (by thy hearing, etc. ) .
? 6. What effects does Extreme Unction produce in the soul?
Extreme Unction, 1. Increases sanctifying grace; 2, It remits venial sins, and also those mortal sins which the sick person can no more confess; 3. It removes the remains1 of sins already forgiven; and 4. It strengthens the soul in her sufferings and temptations, especially in her agony.
1 By remains of sins we understand the temporal punishment, the evil inclinations of the heart, and the weakness of the will, which are the consequences of sins committed, and remain even after the sins have been forgiven.
? 7. What effects does Extreme Unction produce in the body?
It often relieves the pains of the sick person, and sometimes restores him even to health, if it be expedient for the salvation of his soul.
? 8. Who can and ought to receive Extreme Unction?
Every Catholic who has come to the use of reason, and is so ill as to be in danger of death; but not persons in health, even though they are in danger of death.
? 9. How are we to receive Extreme Unction?
We are to receive it,
1. In the state of grace; wherefore we must previously, if possible, confess our sins, or, at least, make an Act of Perfect Contrition; and
2. With faith, hope, and charity, and resignation to the will of God.
Acts of these and similar virtues should often be made by the sick person during illness, especially when his end approaches,
and all present ought to help him to do so. It may be briefly done in the following words:
I believe, my God, in Thee,
I most firmly hope in Thee,
And I love most truly Thee,
And all men are dear to me.
All my sins are grieving me.
Which, I beg Thee, pardon me.
I resign myself to Thee,
Thank for good and evil Thee;
Nay, I'll live and die for Thee. Amen.
? 10. When should we receive Extreme Unction?
We should receive it if possible, whilst we are still in our senses, and after having received the Viaticum.
? 11. How often can Extreme Unction be received?
In each dangerous illness it can be received once; it can, however, be repeated on relapse into danger that had passed.
? 12. Is it not unreasonable for a person, from fear of death, to defer, or even neglect, the receiving of Extreme Unction until he is at the point of death?
Certainly; for,
1. Extreme Unction has been instituted even for the health of the body;
2. The sick person will recover more probably, if he employs in time the remedy ordained by God, than if he waits until he cannot recover except by a miracle; and
? 3. If his sickness be mortal, what should he wish for more earnestly than to die happy, which this Holy Sacrament gives him grace to do?
Relatives also, or attendants, of the sick person, sin grievously, if through their fault the last Sacraments are not administered to him in due time. ' His sisters, therefore, sent to Him, saying: Lord, behold, he whom Thou lovest is sick' (John xi. 3). The person who goes to call the Priest should be able to explain the condition of the patient, in order that the Priest may be able to decide whether or not he is to bring the Holy Viaticum with him.
Application. When God in His mercy visits you with a dangerous illness, be sure not to put off the receiving of the Holy Sacraments to the last moment; otherwise death may surprise you when it is no longer possible to have the attendance of a Priest.
Holy Orders.
? 1. On whom did Christ Himself confer the Priesthood?
On His Apostles.
? 2. Was the Priesthood to end with the death of the Apostles?
No; no more than the Church was to end at their death.
? 3. How was the Priesthood continued?
By the Sacrament of Holy Orders.
? 4. What is Holy Orders?
Holy Orders is that Sacrament which communicates to those who receive it the full power of Priesthood, together with a special grace to discharge their sacred duties well.
? 5. What are the principal powers of the Priesthood?
1. The. power to change bread and wine into the Body and Blood of our Lord; and 2. The power to forgive sins.
The power of consecrating bread and wine Christ gave to His Church at the Last Chapter (comp, p. 263, quest. 9); and the power of forgiving sins He gave after His Resurrection (comp. p. 275, quest. 4),
? 6. Is there in Holy Orders also a visible sign which indicates the communicating of the invisible power and grace?
Yes, there are several: the imposition of hands and the prayer of the Bishop, and the delivery of the chalice with wine, and of the paten with bread.
The imposition of hands and prayer are also mentioned in Holy Scripture: 'I admonish thee, that thou stir up the grace of God which is in thee by the imposition of my hands.' Thus wrote St. Paul to Bishop Timothy, 2 Tim. i. 6; and in a similar manner, 1 Tim. iv. 14. By prayer and imposition of hands Paul and Barnabas were also ordained: 'Then they,, fasting and praying, and imposing their hands upon them, sent them away' (Acts xiii. 3).
? 7. But are not 'all' Christians true Priests by their Baptism?
No; as the true Priesthood of the Old Law was propagated by natural descent from Aaron, so it is also in the New Law propagated by a spiritual descent from the Apostles — that is, by ordination.
8. Why, then, does St. Peter say that all Christians are 'a kingly Priesthood'? (i Pet. ii. 9).
Because all, by their Baptism, are obliged to offer up to God internal or spiritual sacrifices (1 Pet. ii. 5) of faith, hope, and charity, of prayer and mortification.
From this passage it can no more be inferred that all Christians are true Priests than that all are true Kings. In the Old Law, also, God said to the Israelites: 'You shall be to me a priestly kingdom' (2 Kings xix. 6); nevertheless, there was a particular Priesthood, which alone was authorized to offer sacrifices. — Punishment of King Ozias (2 Paral. xxvi.).
? 9. Who can validly administer the Sacrament of Holy Orders?
Bishops only, who have received this power by a particular Consecration.
As no one can be made a Priest except by the Sacrament of Holy Orders, which can validly be administered only by a Bishop, who again has received the power of administering it from another Bishop lawfully consecrated, it is evident that, by an uninterrupted succession of Bishops lawfully ordained and consecrated, the Priesthood ascends to the Apostles, on whom Christ Himself conferred the Priestly and Episcopal powers both for themselves and for their successors.
? 10. Cannot also civil authorities, or Christian communities, confer spiritual powers?
No; they cannot confer spiritual powers on others, because they have none themselves.
Hence the Council of Trent decrees (Sess. XXIII, ch. 4) 'that all those who, being only called and instituted by the people, or by the civil power and magistrate, ascend to the exercise of these ministrations, and those who of their own rashness assume them to themselves, are not to be looked upon as ministers of the Church, but as thieves mid robbers, who have not entered by the door' (John x. 1, 8).
? 11. Can a Priest be deprived of his Ordination?
No; he can as little be deprived of Ordination as of Baptism, because it imprints an indelible character upon the soul.
A Priest, therefore, or a Bishop, cannot be deprived of the powers which he has received in his Ordination or Consecration to change bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and to offer up the H0I7 Sacrifice of the Mass, to administer Confirmation, Extreme Unction, and Holy Orders; but the power of remitting sins by Sacramental Absolution can be taken from him, because the valid administration of the Sacrament of Penance is also dependent on Jurisdiction — that is to say, on his mission or authorization by a lawful spiritual Superior (comp. p. 280, note to quest. 7). For this very reason the Priest and Bishops of the schismatical Greek Church, and all those who ever have fallen away from the Catholic Church, retain the powers of their Ordination and Consecration which originally they received from the Catholic Church; but all other spiritual power which depends on the Apostolical Mission, and comes from the Head of the Catholic Church, expires with their separation from the Church.
? 12. Are there any other Orders besides those of Priest and Bishop?
Yes; there are others which are preparatory degrees to the Priesthood.
? 13. Which are these other Orders?
1. The Four Minor Orders, by which those who receive them are qualified for various offices connected with the Divine Service; namely, those of Porter, Lector, Exorcist, and Acolyte.
2. The Order of Sub-deacon, who has to assist the Deacon when serving at the altar; and
3. The Order of Deacon, who immediately assists the Priest at the altar, and helps him also in baptizing, preaching, and giving Holy Communion.
? 14. Who can and ought to embrace the Ecclesiastical state?
He only who is called to it by Godparents who, actuated by temporal . interests, force their children to take Holy Orders, sin most grievously, and are responsible for all the evil consequences resulting from it.
? 15. What should the faithful do in order to obtain worthy Priests and Pastors?
They should often and fervently pray to God for that grace, and render themselves worthy of it by their love of the Church and respect for the Priesthood.
'Pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the harvest, that He send forth laborers into His harvest' (Matt. ix. 38).
Application. Always show due respect and submission to Priests, as the Representatives of God and the Dispensers of His Holy Mysteries: and should you happen to perceive in any of them human failings and infirmities, do not be scandalized, but 'whatsoever they shall say to you, observe and do; but according to their works do ye not ' ( Matt, xxiii. 3 ).
Matrimony.
? 1. By whom was Matrimony instituted?
Matrimony was instituted by God Himself, when He gave to Adam in Paradise Eve for his wife, that they both might lead a godly life, and live together in faithful and indissoluble love.
? 2. Was the sanctity of Matrimony always respected according to its original institution?
No. When by sin the entire human race had fallen away from God, the contract of marriage was no longer kept so holy, until our Saviour came, and not only restored Matrimony as God had originally instituted it, but also elevated it to the dignity of a Sacrament.
? 3. How did Christ restore Matrimony to its original institution?
He ordained that Marriage should again, as it was from the beginning, subsist between one man and one woman only, and that unto the death of either of them; and He proposed, therefore, His spiritual union with the Church as an example to married people (Ephes. v.).
'Moses, by reason of the hardness of your heart, permitted you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it was not so. And I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, and shall marry another, committeth adultery; and he that shall marry her that is put away committeth adultery' (Matt. xix. 8, 9, and Luke xvi. 18; Mark x. 11, 12).
? 4. Can, then, the bond of Marriage never be dissolved?
Spiritual Superiors can, indeed, for important reasons, allow a husband and wife to live separated from each other; but, nevertheless, they continue married people, and neither of them can validly contract a second marriage whilst the other party is living,
'To them that are married, not I, but the Lord commandeth that the wife depart not from her husband. And if she depart, that she remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. And let not the husband put away his wife' (1 Cor. vii. 10, 11). The bond of Christian marriage cannot be dissolved by the civil law, because the civil authority cannot interfere with the Sacrament, and cannot put asunder what God has joined.
? 5. How do we know that Matrimony is a Sacrament?
1. St. Paul teaches so, who calls Matrimony in the Church 'a great Sacrament'1 (Ephes. v. 32);
2. The Church has at all times believed and taught so, as is evident, not only from the Holy Fathers, but also from the fact that those Sects who in the first ages separated themselves from us agree in holding this doctrine.
1 St. Paul teaches that husbands and wives should be united with each other, as Christ and His Church are united. Now, the union that subsists between Christ and His Church is supernatural and replete with graces; consequently, Matrimony is a sign to which invisible grace is attached, and, therefore, a Sacrament.
? 6. What, then, is Matrimony in the Church of Christ?
Matrimony is a Sacrament by which two single persons, man and woman, are married to each other, and receive grace from God to discharge the duties of their state faithfully until death.
? 7. How is this Sacrament received?
The bridegroom and the bride declare before a duly-authorized Priest and two witnesses that they take each other for wife and husband, whereupon the Priest blesses their union.
? 8. What are the duties of married persons?
1. They should take the mutual love of Christ and His Church for their model and live with each other in peace and conjugal fidelity, until death separates them;
2. They should edify each other by leading a holy life;1
3. They should concur together in bringing up their children in the fear of God, and suffer no servants to be in their house who might endanger their innocence;
4. The husband should treat his wife with kindness, support and cherish her; the wife should obey her husband in all that is just and honorable, and conscientiously manage the domestic concerns.2
1'Marriage honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; for fornicators and adulterers God will judge' (Heb. xiii. 4). 2'As the Church is subject to Christ, so also let the wives be to their husbands in all things'; i.e., that are just and honorable. 'Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved the Church, and delivered Himself up for it. . . . For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, as also Christ doth the Church' (Ephes. v. 24-29).
? 9. What should married people consider when they are tempted to break their conjugal fidelity?
1. That by adultery they break the solemn contract they have made in the presence of God and of the Church;
2. That they break the most sacred bond by which, according to God's disposal, human society is united and kept together;
3. That they disturb domestic peace, hinder the good education of their children, and destroy the happiness of the whole family; and
4. That they expose themselves to the danger of falling into disgrace and misery, and all sorts of sins and vices, and even of being severely chastised, and ultimately entirely rejected by God Himself.
'He that is an adulterer shall destroy his own soul; he gathereth to himself shame and dishonor, and his reproach shall not be blotted out' (Prov. vi. 32, 33).
In the Old Law adultery was, by God's command, punished with death, and, in the Primitive Church, with public penance of many years, like manslaughter.
? 10. What should these people bear in mind who intend to enter the married state?
1. They should not thoughtlessly, and without due reflection, enter into an engagement to marry.
2. They should be properly instructed, confirmed, and be free from impediments;
3. They should live innocently whilst they are engaged, and should not think that, during that time, they are allowed sinful liberties on that account.
4. They should enter the marriage state with a pure and holy intention; and
5. Before they marry, they should make a good Confession and worthily receive Holy Communion.
'We are the children of saints, and we must not be joined together like heathens, that know not God' (Tob. viii. 5).
? 11. Who may be said to espouse each other thoughtlessly?
1. All who neglect to have previous recourse to God, and disregard His will, the advice of their parents, and the salvation of their own soul in the affair (Prov. xix. 14);
2. Those who, in their choice, care less for religion and virtue than for temporal advantages, etc.; and
3. Those who do not first consider whether they will be able to fulfil the weighty duties of the married state.
The husband should be able to maintain his wife and children; he should not be a free-thinker, or addicted to gambling drinking, quarrelling, cursing, etc. ' The wife should be free from vanity, love of finery, and capriciousness; she should be chaste, pious, modest, industrious, and economical. Both should possess the virtue, intelligence, and knowledge in religious matters requisite to give their children a Christian education.
? 12. How is a binding engagement to marry entered into?
The engagement must be in writing and signed by the two parties in presence of the Pastor of one of them, of the Bishop, or two other witnesses.
? 13. What sin do they commit who receive the Sacrament of Matrimony with an unholy intention, or in the state of moral sin?
They render themselves guilty of sacrilege, and, there fore, unworthy of all the Divine graces and blessings attached to the Sacrament.
? 14. What is meant by an invalid marriage?
It is one that is entirely destitute of effect in the eye of God and of the Church.
? 15. What should they do who are married invalidly?
They should go at once to the priest and be properly married, or else separate.
? 16. What things make a marriage invalid?
Three things: 1. Imperfect consent; 2. want of proper form; or 3. existence of an impediment.
? 17. What is meant by imperfect consent?
It is consent that is given out of ignorance or fear.
? 18. What is meant by the proper form of marriage?
It is that formality without which the Church will no recognize the marriage, and consists in the presence a duly qualified Priest and at least two witnesses.
? 19. What are impediments?
Impediments are circumstances which from the nature of the case or the law of God or of the Church prevent the marriage.
? 20. How many kinds of impediments are there?
There are two kinds:
1. Such as render the marriage illegal, as for instance certain vows, and difference of religion between the parties where both are baptized.
2. Such as render it not only illegal, but null if attempted. These are: lack of proper age, physical incapacity, bond of previous marriage still existing, difference of religion between a Catholic and an unbaptized person, sacred orders, solemn religious profession, relationship by blood or marriage, spiritual relationship, public propriety, abduction and crime.
