A Short History of Revealed Religion · From Moses to Christ
From Moses to Christ.
9. After Joseph's death, the Israelites grew into a great people, insomuch that the Egyptians, fearing they might become too powerful, reduced them to the hardest slavery. At length the Lord appeared to Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush, and commissioned him to lead the children of Israel back to Chanaan. Pharao, King of Egypt, would not let them go; and therefore Almighty God sent dreadful plagues over all his dominions. At last an angel in one night slew all the first-born of the Egyptians. But the destroying angel did not harm the Israelites, because they had sprinkled the doors of their houses with the blood of the paschal lamb, which, according to God's command, they ate that very night.
By this was foreshown how, one day, mankind should be delivered from eternal death by the Blood of Jesus Christ, the true Divine Paschal Lamb, which we eat in the Holy Eucharist.
10. Then Pharao permitted the Israelites to depart; but he soon regretted it. In all haste he collected his troops, and pursued the unarmed Israelites to the shores of the Red Sea. Here, struck with alarm and dread of being drowned or slaughtered, they implored the assistance of God; and Moses, by the -command of God, stretched forth his rod over the Red Sea; and, behold, the waters were divided before them, and stood like a wall on their right hand and on their left, and they passed through on dry ground. Pharao rushed furiously after them into the midst of the sea; whereupon Moses once more stretched forth his rod over the waters, and they suddenly returned to their former place, and buried Pharao with his whole army in the deep.
11. The children of Israel had now to travel through a vast wilderness, and came, fifty days after their departure from Egypt, to Mount Sinai, where God, amidst thunder and lightning, gave them the Ten Commandments, written on two tables of stone. He also renewed with them the covenant He had made with their fathers, and regulated their religious and civil duties by most salutary laws. But the people soon forgot the Commandments and blessings of God, and continually complained and murmured; nay, they debased themselves to such a degree that they made a golden calf, and adored it as their god.
12. In punishment of these and many other grievous sins, the Israelites had to remain forty years in the desert, until another and better .generation had grown up. Nevertheless, God continually bestowed favors upon them. He rained bread, called manna, from Heaven for them, and gave them water from a rock; and at last, after Moses' death, He conducted them into Chanaan, or Palestine, the promised land, which they conquered with His powerful assistance, and divided into twelve parts, giving one of them to each of the twelve tribes.
All this was a figure of the future salvation of mankind. 1 Cor. X. 6. The deliverance from the bondage of Egypt signifies our liberation from the slavery of Satan by Jesus Christ. The journey through the wilderness signifies our pilgrimage in this world, where God gives us His laws, nourishes us with the true Bread of Heaven, and strengthens us with the life-giving fountains of grace. The land of promise refers us to Heaven, which we can conquer and take possession of only after combating the world, the flesh, and the devil.
13. In this beautiful country the Israelites lived happy, and were blessed by God, until, contrary to His express command, they united themselves by marriage to the Gentiles, or Pagans, and thereby fell again into vice and idolatry. As often as they turned away from God He abandoned them to their enemies; but when they returned to Him, He raised among them pious heroes called Judges, such as Gedeon, Jephte, and Samson, who rescued them from their foes.
14. For more than four hundred years the people of Israel were ruled by the high-priests and Judges, who were invested with supreme authority over them; but at length they desired to be governed, like the neighboring nations, by a king. In compliance with their wish, God appointed Saul to be their king, and the Prophet Samuel anointed him about 1095 B.C. He was, however, afterwards rejected by God for his disobedience, and was succeeded by David. David was strong and mighty: when only a youth, he had slain the giant Goliath; and having been made king, he extended his kingdom by splendid victories. He served God with an upright heart, and composed in His honor those beautiful sacred songs called Psalms, in which, by Divine inspiration, he prophesied many things concerning the Redeemer of the world, who was to be born of his family, and whose kingdom should have no end. For this reason Christ is also called the Son of David.
15. Solomon, his son and successor, was a wise and great king. He built a magnificent temple to the Lord in Jerusalem about the year 1000 B.C. The Sanctuary, or Holy of Holies, was overlaid with plates of the purest gold; and in it was kept the Ark of the Covenant, which contained the two Tables of Laws written by God Himself. The high-priest was the only person who was allowed, once a year, to enter the Sanctuary. The people of Israel had no other temple, nor was any one permitted to offer up sacrifice in any other place, than the temple of Jerusalem. Solomon, however, did not persevere in wisdom and goodness. He married pagan wives, and, towards the end of his life, had the misfortune of being seduced by them from the service of God into the impious practices of idolatry.
16. After Solomon's death, his kingdom was divided. The tribes of Juda and Benjamin remained faithful to King Roboam, his son, and formed the kingdom of Juda, the chief city of which was Jerusalem. The other ten tribes chose Jeroboam for their King, and made Samaria the capital of their kingdom, which from that time was called the kingdom of Israel. At the same time they abandoned the religion of their fathers, built a temple for themselves at Samaria, and introduced many kinds of the most abominable idolatry. God, therefore, delivered them into the hands of the pagan king, Salmanasar, who destroyed the kingdom of Israel for ever, and led the people to Ninive, into the Assyrian Captivity, about seven hundred years before Christ. The kingdom of Juda was also repeatedly chastised by God for its many transgressions. Nabuchodonosor (Nebuchadnezzar) II. took Jerusalem, pillaged the temple, and sent the sacred vessels and a large number of Jews to Babylon; and in 588 he entirely demolished the temple and the city, carried Sedecias, the last King of Juda, with the rest of the inhabitants, into the same Babylonian Captivity. But the kingdom of Juda was not destroyed for ever, like the kingdom of Israel, that had forsaken the religion of its fathers.
17. These severe judgments of God did not by any means overtake Juda suddenly and unexpectedly. Men enlightened by God, who were called Prophets, had announced them long before, confirming their words by great miracles, in order to rouse the people to repentance. These same prophets also promised pardon to those who should repent, and prophesied of the Redeemer who was to come. In their books, written many centuries before Christ, we read all the circumstances of His life and sufferings: His birth of a Virgin at Bethlehem, His office of teaching, His miracles. His passion, His death, His resurrection, the sending of the Holy Ghost, the destruction of Jerusalem, the conversion of the Gentiles, and the splendor of the Christian Church; nay, Daniel foretold the very year in which the Saviour was to appear. The most remarkable amongst the prophets are Elias, Eliseus, Isaias, Jeremias, Ezechiel, and Daniel.
18. During the time of the Captivity, illustrious examples of rare virtues were given by Tobias at Ninive; and at Babylon, by the chaste Susanna, by the three young men in the fiery furnace, and by Daniel in the lions' den. The Babylonian Captivity had already lasted seventy years, when Cyrus, King of Persia, took Babylon, and, by Divine inspiration, gave permission to the Jews to return to their own country (b.c. 536) and to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem. In a short time the second temple was finished; and when the old men began to complain that its magnificence was far inferior to that of the first, the Prophet Aggeus foretold to them that the glory of this latter house should be greater than that of the former, because the 'Desired of all nations,' the Messias, would enter it (Agg. ii. 8-10).
19. Esdras and Nehemias now reestablished the Divine service in conformity to the law, and collected the Sacred Scriptures, which thenceforth were diligently read and interpreted. All the people shed tears and repented most sincerely. They never more returned to the sin of idolatry, which had brought upon their fathers the grievous sufferings of their captivity. "When, some time later, Antiochus, King of Syria, tried to compel them to adore idols, they resisted most courageously under the command of the High-Priest Mathathias and his sons; nay, many of them, animated by the glorious example of the aged Eleazar, of the seven brothers, commonly called the Machabees, and of their heroic mother, preferred to suffer the most atrocious of deaths, rather than disobey the law of God.
20. At length the time fixed by God for the fulfilment of His promise arrived; and the signs that were to precede the coming of the Redeemer of mankind were accomplished. The Jews longed for it with the greatest anxiety, and even among the Gentiles there was a current opinion that a great Ruler was to rise in Judea. The corruption in which the world was sunk was unbounded. The Jews, indeed, still acknowledged the one true God; but impious sects, such as the Pharisees and Sadducees, had sprung up amongst them, and a great corruption of morals had gained ground. Most of them honored God only with their lips, but their conduct was according to the sinful desires of their heart. All other nations, even the most enlightened among them, the Greeks and Romans, were devoted to the most shameful idolatry. Innumerable were the gods and goddesses to whom they built temples and altars, and offered sacrifices, even of human beings; and whom they believed they particularly honored when they extolled their infamous vices and imitated them without shame or fear. Such were the heathens, as St. Paul testifies (Rom. i. 29-31): "Filled with all iniquity, malice, fornication, avarice, wickedness; full of envy, murder, contention, deceit, malignity; whisperers, detractors, hateful to God, contumelious, proud, haughty, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, foolish, dissolute, without affection, without fidelity, without mercy." Who was then able to help and save mankind? God alone; and He did help and did save them. As He had promised to our first parents in Paradise, and foretold by the prophets. He now showed mercy to mankind, when in their utmost degeneracy, and sent them a Redeemer and Saviour; for 'God so loved the world as to give His Only-Begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him may not perish, but may have, life everlasting ' (John iii. 16).
