Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter II: The Sacraments (6 of 6)
? 21. What is understood by the ' forbidden times '?
1. The time which begins with the first Sunday of advent and ends with the Epiphany of our Lord; and that which begins with Ash Wednesday and ends with Low Sunday, within which times the Church forbids the solemnizing of marriage, because they have been particularly set apart for penance and prayer.
This Commandment of the Church does not forbid marriages during Lent and Advent; it forbids them to be solemnized; that the Priest is not allowed to say the Mass appointed in the missal for the bridegroom and bride, nor to give the solemn nuptial benediction.
? 22. Can the Impediments of Marriage never be dispensed with?
The Church can dispense with some when there are sufficient reasons, but not with all; on this subject the parties must confer with their Pastor.
That the reasons must be weighty, is evident from the decree of the Council of Trent (Sess. 24, Cli. v.), which says lat ' Impediments of marriage are either never, or but rarely, ) be dispensed with. '
? 23. What should we think of 'mixed' marriages — i.e., marriages which are contracted between Catholics and non-Catholics, especially Protestants?
That the Church has, at all times, disapproved of such marriages, and never permits them, except on certain conditions.
? 24. Why does the Church disapprove of such marriages?
1. Because the Catholic party is exposed to great danger of either losing the faith or of becoming indifferent;
2. Because the Catholic education of the children is generally deficient, and not seldom impossible;
3. Because the non-Catholic party usually does not acknowledge Matrimony either as a Sacrament or as indissoluble, and can, therefore, according to his or her principles, separate, and marry again, which the Catholic consort is not permitted to do; and
4. Because for that very reason such a marriage never is a true emblem of the most intimate, indissoluble union of Christ with His Church, which every Christian marriage ought to be;
5. Because the happiness of married life depends, above all, on unity of faith.
? 19. On what conditions does the Church consent to a mixed marriage?
On these: 1. That the Catholic party be allowed the free exercise of religion; 2. That all the children be brought up in the Catholic religion (Briefs of Pius VIII. and Gregory XVI.); and 3. That the Catholic party earnestly endeavor to gain by persuasion the non-Catholic consort to the true Church.
? 20. Is the Church obliged to require such conditions?
Yes; otherwise she would either be indifferent to the eternal welfare of her children, or deny that she alone is the true saving Church.
? 21. Can, then, a person never be permitted to contract a mixed marriage, unless the Catholic education of the children be previously secured?
No; for such a marriage would be a grievous sin against the Catholic Church and the spiritual welfare of the children that may be born; wherefore the Church can in no case give her consent to it.
Parents who freely consent to such a marriage of their child render themselves guilty of the same sin as the child, and incur a severe responsibility before God.
Application. In the choice of a state of life consult above all things, God and the salvation of your soul. Should you, after a mature deliberation, think that you to be called to the married state, prepare yourself for it by prayer, good works, and especially by a good General Confession, and be careful not to follow those who, by sin and vice draw the curse of God upon their heads.
