Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter IV: Sacramentals
CHAPTER IV.
Sacramentals.
? 1. What do we usually understand by Sacramentals?
By Sacramentals we understand,
1. All those things which the Church blesses or consecrates for the Divine Service, or for our own pious use: as Holy Water, Oil, Salt, Bread, Wine, 'Palms, Altars, Chalices, etc.;
2. Also the Exorcisms, Blessings, and Consecrations used by the Church.
? 2. Why are such things called Sacramentals?
They are called Sacramentals because they resemble the Sacraments, though they are essentially different from them.
? 3. What is the difference between the Sacramentals and the Sacraments?
1. The Sacraments were instituted by God, and operate by the power which God gave them; the Sacramentals, on the contrary, were instituted by the Church, and produce their effects by the prayers and blessings of the Church;
3. The Sacraments have an infallible effect, unless we put an obstacle in their way; but the effect of the Sacramentals depends principally on the pious intention of the person who makes use of them;
3. The Sacraments effect immediately inward sanctification, whereas the Sacramentals, by imparting minor graces, only contribute towards it, and protect us also from temporal evils;
4. The Sacraments are in general necessary, and commanded by God; but the Sacramentals are only recommended by the Church as useful and wholesome.
? 4. Why does the Church consecrate or bless the things belonging to the Divine Service?
The Church consecrates or blesses all those things that belong to the Divine Service, as Churches, Altars, Bells, Vestments, etc., 1. In order to sanctify them, and dedicate them peculiarly to the Divine Service; and 2. To render them more venerable and salutary to us. (Anniversary of the Dedication of a Church.)
'Every creature is sanctified by the word of God and prayer' (1 Tim. iv. 5). Thus, even in the Old Law, the altar and all the vessels thereof were sprinkled and anointed, as the Lord had commanded (Levit. viii. 11).
? 5. Why does the Church bless also Bread, Wine, the Fruits of the field, and such like things?
The Church blesses these things,
1. After the example of Jesus Christ, who also blessed loaves and fishes (Luke ix. 16);
2. That 'to them that love God, all things [may] work together unto good' (Rom. viii. 28); and
3. That as by the sin of Adam the curse of God extended to all the creatures of the earth (Gen. iii. 17; Rom. viii. 20-22), so also His blessings may be poured out over all.
From our birth to our death the Church incessantly shows her love and solicitude for us: she prays for us, consoles us, helps us, blesses us; even over our last place of rest — the cemetery and grave — she pronounces her blessing.
? 6. Why should we especially make a devout use of the Sacramentals?
Because we share through them in the prayer and blessing of the whole Church, in the name of which the Priest consecrates and blesses.
If in the Old Law the blessing of the patriarchs was so highly esteemed, how much more should we esteem the blessing of the Church, which Christ has entrusted with the inexhaustible treasure of His means of grace and salvation!
? 7. Has, then, the prayer of the Church a particular efficacy?
Yes, the prayer of the Church has a particular efficacy,
1. Because she is the Body of Christ, animated and guided by His Spirit; and 2. Because her prayer is always united with the prayer of Jesus and His Saints.
? 8. What does the Church usually pray for when she consecrates or blesses?
She prays for the averting of the judgments of God, for protection against the devil, for peace, blessing, well-being of the soul and body, etc.
That the Church should use symbolical signs, especially the Sign of the Cross, and blessed things, as Holy Water, Holy Oils, Agnus Dei's, Palms, etc., in imparting her blessing and the fruits of her prayer, ought not to surprise us more than that God, both in the Old and New Testament, was pleased to distribute His graces and blessings to the people by means of various signs and things (see Num. xxi. 9; Tob. vi. 8 and 11; 4 Kings V. and xiii.; Mark vi. 13, etc.).
? 9. How should we use Holy Water?
A pious Christian sprinkles himself with Holy Water not only when he enters or leaves the Church, but also in his house, when rising and going to bed, when going out and returning, and on many other occasions; and, at the same time, he begs of God that, through the Blood of Jesus Christ, he may be more and more purified, and be protected in all dangers of soul and body.
? 10. Why are the people sprinkled with Holy Water before High Mass?
Because we should be pure and holy when we appear in the presence of God, and pray to Him.
Application. Beware of being indifferent to the prayers and blessings of the Church, but respect and esteem them, and use all things blessed by the Church, especially Holy Water, with due reverence and devotion.
