Part III: The Means of Grace · Chapter V: Religious Practices and Ceremonies in General, and on some in Particular
CHAPTER V.
Religious Practices and Ceremonies in General, and on Some in Particular.
1. What do we understand by 'Religious Ceremonies'?'
By Religious Ceremonies we understand certain significant signs or actions, which the Church has established for the celebration of the Divine Service.
? 2. Why is the instruction on 'Prayer' and the 'Sacramentals' followed here by the explanation of 'Religious Practices and Ceremonies'?
1. Because Religious Ceremonies have been instituted to give praise and glory to God, no less than Prayer itself; and 2. Because they help us to raise our souls to God and to the contemplation of Divine things, and consequently to pray with attention and devotion.
? 3. How do Ceremonies help us to raise our souls to God and Divine things?
They help us, 1. Because they render the Divine Service more solemn, and thereby hold our attention, and draw it from earthly objects to God; and 2. Because they represent in a visible manner before our eyes mysteries invisible in themselves, and thereby render it easier for us to meditate on them.
? 4. Are not Ceremonies idle Observances?
Not at all; for, 1. God Himself prescribed, under severe penalties, several kinds of Ceremonies to the Jews; 2. Christ our Lord also used various Ceremonies; and 3. He Himself instituted sacramental signs or Ceremonies.
1. See the Book of Leviticus, 2. For instance, when He healed the man that was deaf and dumb (Mark vii.); when He gave sight to the man born blind (John ix.); when He breathed on His disciples, and imparted to them the Holy Ghost (John xx.). 3. When He instituted the Holy Eucharist, Baptism, etc.
5. But must we not adore God in spirit and in truth? (John iv. 24.)
By all means; and therefore the Church wishes that we should not merely assist at the Ceremonies, but also understand their meaning, and accompany them with prayer and pious sentiments.
? 6. Has, then, every Religious Ceremony a meaning?
Yes; all things which the Church makes use of for celebrating the Divine Service have a mystical signification, and are intended to excite our souls to lively sentiments of devotion.
For the Ceremonies of Baptism, see pages 254 and 255; of Confirmation, pages 257 to 259; of the Mass, pages 267 to 271; of the Blessing of water, salt, oil, etc., see pages 323, 324, etc.
? 7. But are there not also Religious Ceremonies and Practices which are useless and superfluous?
No; that which the holy infallible Church ordains, approves, or practises, cannot but be useful and profitable to us, because she is always guided by the Holy Ghost.
? 8. What is, then, the use of 'Incense'?
Incense is an emblem of reverence and of prayer which should ascend to Heaven as a sweet odor before God (Ps. cxi. 2).
? 9. What do the 'Lighted Candles' signify?
They signify Faith which enlightens, Hope which soars above this world, and Charity which inflames; and they recall also to our mind those times of persecution when the Christians celebrated the Divine Service in Catacombs or subterranean caverns.
? 10. What do the Candles blessed on the Feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary especially call to our mind?
The words of Simeon, that Jesus is ' a Light to the revelation of the Gentiles.' 1 and that we also are to walk as 'children of the Light' (Luke ii. 32; Ephes. v. 8).
1 That is to say, a Light to be revealed to the Gentiles, or to lighten the Gentiles.
? 11. What does the 'Paschal Candle' remind us of?
It reminds us of Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, who rescued us from the slavery of Satan, as formerly the pillar of fire led the Children of Israel out of the bondage of the Egyptians (Exod. xiv. 20).
? 12. What do the 'Ashes' blessed on Ash-Wednesday call to our remembrance?
That we should humble ourselves, and sincerely repent; therefore the Priest, whilst he puts ashes on our heads, says: 'Remember, man, that thou art dust, and into dust thou shalt return' (Gen. iii. 19).
Ashes were even in the Old Testament an emblem of penance and humility. — Examples: The Ninivites, Judith, Esther, etc.
? 13. What do the 'Palms' on Palm-Sunday call to our mind?
The triumphal entrance of our Lord into Jerusalem, and His victory over Hell; and that we also should strive to gain the palm of eternal life.
? 14. For what end are 'Public Supplications ' and ' Processions' made?
1. To praise God also publicly, to thank Him, to draw down, by our prayers. His protection and blessing upon town and country, and to avert His chastisements;
2. To proclaim the victory and triumph of the Catholic Religion, for which purpose the Cross and Banner precede; and
3. To remind us that we are but pilgrims in this world, and that we should constantly walk before God.
We meet with examples of such Public Supplications and Processions as early as the most ancient times of Christianity.
? 15. What should we think of ' Pilgrimages '?
When they are made according to the intentions of the Church, they are certainly much to be commended; nay, they are even confirmed by the example of the Saints, and by the Indulgences of the Church.
It is true that God is, and hears us, everywhere; nevertheless, He may be more disposed to hear us in certain places, as well as at certain times. Moreover, in Places of Pilgrimage there are many things calculated to excite us to pray with greater fervor and confidence, and, therefore, with more chances of being heard. Should abuses intervene, not the Pilgrimages, but the abuses, should be condemned.
? 16. How does the Church wish Pilgrimages to be made?
The Church wishes, 1. That we should not neglect for them the urgent duties of our state or profession; 2. That we should have a good intention; 3. That we should well employ the time engaged in them, and patiently endure the hardships which attend them; and 4. That we should pray fervently at the Holy Place, and, if possible, go there to Confession and Communion.
? 17. Have Pilgrimages long been in use?
They were in use even under the Old Law, where we see that, by an express command of God, the Israelites went on a pilgrimage to the Temple of Jerusalem, as did also Jesus and Mary. and the first Christians went frequently to the place where Christ lived and suffered, and to the tombs of the Apostles and holy Martyrs.
? 18. What are 'Confraternities'?
They are pious Associations, generally approved of by the Popes, and established for the purposes of mutual prayer, encouragement, and assistance in the performance of good works and the frequentation of the Sacraments.
Since Confraternities conduce much to holiness of life, when the rules — which, however, as such, do not bind under pain of any sin — are well kept, the Church has granted them ample Indulgences; yet all are free to apply or not for admittance into them.
Application. Take part with great devotion in the Religious Practices and Ceremonies of the Church, and never suffer yourself to be diverted from them either by the mockery or example of impious or thoughtless people.
