Opening
TO SUBSCRIBERS.
MESSRS. CLARK have much pleasure in publishing the first issue of Translations of the Writings of St. Augustine:
THE 'CITY OF GOD,'
In Two Volumes.
They believe this will prove not the least valuable of their various Series, and no pains will be spared to make it so. The Editor has secured a most competent staff of Translators, and every care is being taken to secure not only accuracy but elegance.
The Works of St. Augustine to be included in the Series are (in addition to the 'City of God'):—
All the Treatises in the Pelagian, and the four leading Treatises in the Donatist Controversy.
The Treatises against Faustus the Manichæan; on Christian Doctrine; the Trinity; the Harmony of the Evangelists; the Sermon on the Mount.
Also, the Lectures on the Gospel of St. John, the Confessions, a Selection from the Letters, the Retractations, the Soliloquies, and Selections from the Practical Treatises.
All these works are of first-rate importance, and only a small proportion of them have yet appeared in an English dress. The Sermons and the Commentaries on the Psalms having been already given by the Oxford Translators, it is not intended, at least in the first instance, to publish them.
The Series will include a Life of St. Augustine, by Robert Rainy, D.D., Professor of Church History, New College, Edinburgh.
The Series will probably extend to Sixteen or Eighteen Volumes. The Publishers will be glad to receive the Names of Subscribers as early as possible.
Subscription: Four Volumes for a Guinea, payable in advance, as in the case of the Ante-Nicene Series (24s. when not paid in advance).
It is understood that Subscribers are bound to take at least the books of the first two years. Each Volume will be sold separately at (on an average) 10s. 6d. each volume.
The second issue will be ready in a few months, and will probably comprise:—The Volume on the Donatist Controversy, translated by the Rev. J. R. King, Vicar of St. Peter's in the East, Oxford; and the First Volume of the Treatises in the Pelagian Controversy, translated by Rev. Peter Holmes, D.D., Rural Dean, etc., Plymouth.
They trust the Subscribers to the Ante-Nicene Library will continue their Subscription to this Series, and they hope to be favoured with an early remittance of the Subscription.
