The Four Approved Litanies · Litany of the Most Holy Name of Jesus
LORD, have mercy on us.	Christ, have mercy on us.	Lord, have mercy on us.	Jesus, hear us.	Jesus, graciously hear us.	God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.	God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.	God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.	Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.	Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us.	Jesus, splendor of the Father, have mercy on us.	Jesus, brightness of eternal light, have mercy on us.	Jesus, king of glory, have mercy on us.	Jesus, sun of justice, have mercy on us.	Jesus, Son of the Virgin Mary, have mercy on us.	Jesus amiable, have mercy on us.	Jesus admirable, have mercy on us.	Jesus, powerful God, have mercy on us.	Jesus, Father of the world to come, have mercy on us.	Jesus, angel of the great council, have mercy on us.	Jesus most powerful, have mercy on us.	Jesus most patient, have mercy on us.	Jesus most obedient, have mercy on us.	Jesus meek and humble of heart, have mercy on us.	Jesus, lover of chastity, have mercy on us.	Jesus, lover of us, have mercy on us.	Jesus, God of peace, have mercy on us.	Jesus, author of life, have mercy on us.	Jesus, model of all virtues, have mercy on us.	Jesus, zealous for souls, have mercy on us.	Jesus, our God, have mercy on us.	Jesus, our refuge, have mercy on us.	Jesus, father of the poor, have mercy on us.	Jesus, treasure of the faithful, have mercy on us.	Jesus, good shepherd, have mercy on us.	Jesus, true light, have mercy on us.	Jesus, eternal wisdom, have mercy on us.	Jesus, infinite goodness, have mercy on us.	Jesus, our way and our life, have mercy on us.	Jesus, joy of angels, have mercy on us.	Jesus, king of patriarchs, have mercy on us.	Jesus, master of the apostles, have mercy on us.	Jesus, teacher of the evangelists, have mercy on us.	Jesus, strength of martyrs, have mercy on us.	Jesus, light of confessors, have mercy on us.	Jesus, purity of virgins, have mercy on us.	Jesus, crown of all saints, have mercy on us.	Be merciful, spare us, O Jesus.	Be merciful, graciously hear us, O Jesus.	From all evil, deliver us, O Jesus.	From all sin, deliver us, O Jesus.	From Thy wrath, deliver us, O Jesus.	From the snares of the devil, deliver us, O Jesus.	From the spirit of fornication, deliver us, O Jesus.	From eternal death, deliver us, O Jesus.	From the neglect of Thy inspirations, deliver us, O Jesus.	By the mystery of Thy holy incarnation, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy nativity, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy infancy, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy most divine life, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy labors, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy agony and passion, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy cross and dereliction, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy languors, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy death and burial, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy resurrection, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy ascension, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy joys, deliver us, O Jesus.	By Thy glory, deliver us, O Jesus.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Jesus.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear us, O Jesus.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us, O Jesus.	Jesus, hear us.	Jesus, graciously hear us.
Let us pray
O LORD Jesus Christ, who hast said: Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: mercifully attend to our supplications, and grant us the gift of Thy divine charity, that we may ever love Thee with our whole hearts, and never desist from Thy praise.
Give us, O Lord, a perpetual fear and love of Thy holy name, for Thou never ceasest to direct and govern by Thy grace those whom Thou instructest in the solidity of Thy love; who livest and reignest world without end. Amen.
Indulgence. 300 days, once a day. (Leo XIII, January 16, 1886.)
