Chapter VI — Ralph’s Intercession
Ralph was astonished to find how the thought of the tall girl he had met at Sir Thomas More’s house remained with him. He had reported the result of his interview with More himself to his master; and Cromwell had received it rather coldly. He had sniffed once or twice.
“That was not very well done, Mr. Torridon. I fear that you have frightened him, and gained nothing by it.”
Ralph stood silent.
“But I see you make no excuses,” went on Cromwell, “so I will make them for you. I daresay he was frightened already; and knew all about what had passed between her and the Archbishop. You must try again, sir.”
Ralph felt his heart stir with pleasure.
“I may say I have made friends with Mr. More, sir,” he said. “I had good fortune in the matter of a quotation, and he received me kindly. I can go there again without excusing my presence, as often as you will.”
Cromwell looked at him.
“There is not much to be gained now,” he said, “but you can go if you will; and you may perhaps pick up something here and there. The more friends you make the better.”
Ralph went away delighted; he had not wholly failed then in his master’s business, and he seemed to have set on foot a business of his own; and he contemplated with some excitement his future visits to Chelsea.
He had his first word with the King a couple of months later. He had often, of course, seen him before, once or twice in the House of Lords, formidable and frowning on his throne, his gross chin on his hand, barking out a word or two to his subjects, or instructing them in theology, for which indeed he was very competent; and several times in processions, riding among his gentlemen on his great horse, splendid in velvet and gems; and he had always wondered what it was that gave him his power. It could not be mere despotism, he thought, or his burly English nature; and it was not until he had seen him near at hand, and come within range of his personality that he understood why it was that men bore such things from him.
He was sent for one afternoon by Cromwell to bring a paper and was taken up at once by a servant into the gallery where the minister and the King were walking together. They were at the further end from that at which he entered, and he stood, a little nervous at his heart, but with his usual appearance of self-possession, watching the two great backs turned to him, and waiting to be called.
They turned again in a moment, and Cromwell saw him and beckoned, himself coming a few steps to meet him. The King waited, and Ralph was aware of, rather than saw, that wide, coarse, strong face, and the long narrow eyes, with the feathered cap atop, and the rich jewelled dress beneath. The King stood with his hands behind his back and his legs well apart.
Cromwell took the paper from Ralph, who stepped back, hesitating what to do.
“This is it, your Grace,” said the minister going back again. “Your Grace will see that it is as I said.”
Ralph perceived a new tone of deference in his master’s voice that he had never noticed before, except once when Cromwell was ironically bullying a culprit who was giving trouble.
The King said nothing, took the paper and glanced over it, standing a little aside to let the light fall on it.
“Your Grace will understand—” began Cromwell again.
“Yes, yes, yes,” said the harsh voice impatiently. “Let the fellow take it back,” and he thrust the paper into Cromwell’s hand, who turned once more to Ralph.
“Who is he?” said the King. “I have seen his face. Who are you?”
“This is Mr. Ralph Torridon,” said Cromwell; “a very useful friend to me, your Grace.”
“The Torridons of Overfield?” questioned Henry once more, who never forgot a face or a name.
“Yes, your Grace,” said Cromwell.
“You are tall enough, sir,” said the King, running his narrow eyes up and down Ralph’s figure;—“a strong friend.”
“I hope so, your Grace,” said Ralph.
The King again looked at him, and Ralph dropped his eyes in the glare of that mighty personality. Then Henry abruptly thrust out his hand to be kissed, and as Ralph bent over it he was aware of the thick straight fingers, the creased wrist, and the growth of hair on the back of the hand.
Ralph was astonished, and a little ashamed at his own excitement as he passed down the stairs again. It was so little that had happened; his own part had been so insignificant; and yet he was tingling from head to foot. He felt he knew now a little better how it was that the King’s will, however outrageous in its purposes, was done so quickly. It was the sheer natural genius of authority and royalty that forced it through; he had felt himself dominated and subdued in those few moments, so that he was not his own master. As he went home through the street or two that separated the Palace gate from his own house, he found himself analysing the effect of that presence, and, in spite of its repellence, its suggestion of coarseness, and its almost irritating imperiousness, he was conscious that there was a very strong element of attractiveness in it too. It seemed to him the kind of attractiveness that there is for a beaten dog in the chastising hand: the personality was so overwhelming that it compelled allegiance, and that not wholly one of fear. He found himself thinking of Queen Katharine and understanding a little better how it was that the refined, delicately nurtured and devout woman, so constant in her prayers, so full of the peculiar fineness of character that gentle birth and religion alone confer, could so cling to this fierce lord of hers, throw herself at his feet with tears before all the company, and entreat not to be separated from him, calling him her “dear lord,” her “love,” and her most “merciful and gracious prince.”
The transition from this train of thought to that bearing on Beatrice was not a difficult one; for the memory of the girl was continually in his mind. He had seen her half a dozen times now since their first meeting; for he had availed himself to the full of Cromwell’s encouragement to make himself at home at Chelsea; and he found that his interest in her deepened every time. With a touch of amusement he found himself studying Horace and Terence again, not only for Sir Thomas More’s benefit, but in order to win his approval and his good report to his household, among whom Beatrice was practically to be reckoned.
He was pleased too by More’s account of Beatrice.
“She is nearly as good a scholar as my dear Meg,” he had said one day. “Try her, Mr. Torridon.”
Ralph had carefully prepared an apt quotation that day, and fired it off presently, not at Beatrice, but, as it were, across her; but there was not the faintest response or the quiver of an eyelid.
There was silence a moment; and then Sir Thomas burst out—
“You need not look so demure, my child; we all know that you understand.”
Beatrice had given him a look of tranquil amusement in return.
“I will not be made a show of,” she said.
Ralph went away that day more engrossed than ever. He began to ask himself where his interest in her would end; and wondered at its intensity.
As he questioned himself about it, it seemed that to him it was to a great extent her appearance of detached self-possession that attracted him. It was the quality that he most desired for himself, and one which he had in measure attained; but he was aware that in the presence of Cromwell at least it deserted him. He knew well that he had found his master there, and that he himself was nothing more than a hero-worshipper before a shrine; but it provoked him to feel that there was no one who seemed to occupy the place of a similar divinity with regard to this girl. Obviously she admired and loved Sir Thomas More—Ralph soon found out how deeply in the course of his visits—but she was not in the least afraid of her friend. She serenely contradicted him when she disagreed with what he said, would fail to keep her appointments at his house with the same equanimity, and in spite of Sir Thomas’s personality never appeared to give him more than a friendly and affectionate homage. With regard to Ralph himself, it was the same. She was not in the least awed by him, or apparently impressed by his reputation which at this time was growing rapidly as that of a capable and daring agent of Cromwell’s; and even once or twice when he condescended to hint at the vastness of the affairs on which he was engaged, in a desperate endeavour to rouse her admiration, she only looked at him steadily a moment with very penetrating eyes, and began to speak of something else. He began to feel discouraged.
The first hint that Ralph had that he had been making a mistake in his estimate of her, came from Margaret Roper, who was still living at Chelsea with her husband Will.
Ralph had walked up to the house one bleak afternoon in early spring along the river-bank from Westminster, and had found Margaret alone in the dining-hall, seated by the window with her embroidery in her hand, and a Terence propped open on the sill to catch the last gleams of light from the darkening afternoon. She greeted Ralph warmly, for he was a very familiar figure to them all by now, and soon began to talk, when he had taken a seat by the wide open fireplace whence the flames flickered out, casting shadows and lights round the high room, across the high-hung tapestries and in the gloomy corners.
“Beatrice is here,” she said presently, “upstairs with father. I think she is doing some copying for him.”
“She is a great deal with him,” observed Ralph.
“Why, yes; father thinks so much of her. He says that none can write so well as she, or has such a quick brain. And then she does not talk, he says, nor ask foolish woman-questions like the rest of us.” And Margaret glanced up a moment, smiling.
“I suppose I must not go up,” said Ralph, a little peevishly; for he was tired with his long day.
“Why, no, you must not,” said Margaret, “but she will be down soon, Mr. Torridon.”
There was silence for a moment or two; and then Margaret spoke again.
“Mr. Torridon,” she said, “may I say something?” Ralph made a little sound of assent. The warmth of the fire was making him sleepy.
“Well, it is this,” said Margaret slowly, “I think you believe that Beatrice does not like you. That is not true. She is very fond of you; she thinks a great deal of you,” she added, rather hastily.
Ralph sat up; his drowsiness was gone.
“How do you know that, Mrs. Roper?” he asked. His voice sounded perfectly natural, and Margaret was reassured at the tone of it. She could not see Ralph well; it was getting dark now.
“I know it well,” she said. “Of course we talk of you when you are gone.”
“And does Mrs. Beatrice talk of me?”
“Not so much,” said Margaret, “but she listens very closely; and asks us questions sometimes.” The girl’s heart was beating with excitement as she spoke; but she had made up her mind to seek this opportunity. It seemed a pity, she thought, that two friends of hers should so misunderstood one another.
“And what kind of questions?” asked Ralph again.
“She wonders—what you really think—” went on Margaret slowly, bending down over her embroidery, and punctuating her words with stitches—“about—about affairs—and—and she said one day that—”
“Well?” said Ralph in the same tone.
“That she thought you were not so severe as you seemed,” ended Margaret, her voice a little tremulous with amusement.
Ralph sat perfectly still, staring at the great fire-plate on which a smoky Phoebus in relief drove the chariot of the sun behind the tall wavering flames that rose from the burning logs. He knew very well why Margaret had spoken, and that she would not speak without reason; but the fact revealed was so bewilderingly new to him that he could not take it in. Margaret looked at him once or twice a little uneasily; and at last sighed.
“It is too dark,” she said, “I must fetch candles.”
She slipped out of the side-door that led to the servants’ quarters, and Ralph was left alone. All his weariness was gone now; the whirl of images and schemes with which his brain had been seething as he walked up the river-bank half-an-hour before, had receded into obscurity; and one dominating thought filled their place: What if Margaret were right? And what did he mean to do himself? Surely he was not—
The door from the entrance passage opened, and a tall slender figure stood there, now in light, now in shadow, as the flames rose and fell.
“Meg,” said a voice.
Ralph sat still a moment longer.
“Meg,” said Beatrice again, “how dark you are.”
Ralph stood up.
“Mrs. Roper has just gone,” he said, “you must put up with me, Mrs. Beatrice.”
“Who is it?” said the girl advancing. “Mr. Torridon?”
She had a paper in her hand as she came across the floor, and Ralph drew out a chair for her on the other side of the hearth.
“Yes,” he said. “Mrs. Roper has gone for lights. She will be back immediately.”
Beatrice sat down.
“It is a troublesome word,” she said. “Master More cannot read it himself, and has sent me to ask Meg. He says that every dutiful daughter should be able to read her father’s hand.”
And Ralph could see a faint amused smile in her black eyes, as the firelight shone on them.
“Master More always has an escape ready,” he said, as he too sat down.
The girl’s hand holding the paper suddenly dropped on to her knee, and the man saw she was looking at him oddly.
“Yes?” he said interrogatively; and then—
“Why do you look at me like that, Mrs. Beatrice?”
“It is what you said. Do you really think that, Mr. Torridon?”
Ralph was bewildered for a moment.
“I do not understand,” he said.
“Do you truly think he always has an escape ready?” repeated the girl.
Then Ralph understood.
“You mean he is in danger,” he said steadily. “Well, of course he is. There is no great man that is not. But I do not see why he should not escape as he has always done.”
“You think that, Mr. Torridon?”
“Why, yes;” went on Ralph, a little hastily. “You remember the matter of the bribe. See how he cleared himself. Surely, Mrs. Beatrice—”
“And you really think so,” said the girl. “I know that you know what we do not; and I shall believe what you say.”
“How can I tell?” remonstrated Ralph. “I can only tell you that in this matter I know nothing that you do not. Master More is under no suspicion.”
Beatrice drew a breath of relief.
“I am glad I spoke to you, sir,” she said. “It has been on my mind. And something that he said a few minutes ago frightened me.”
“What did he say?” asked Ralph curiously.
“Ah! it was not much. It was that no man knew what might come next; that matters were very strange and dismaying—and—and that he wanted this paper copied quickly, for fear—”
The girl stopped again, abruptly.
“I know what you feel, Mrs. Beatrice,” said Ralph gently. “I know how you love Master More, and how terrified we may become for our friends.”
“What do you think yourself, Mr. Torridon,” she said suddenly, almost interrupting him.
He looked at her doubtfully a moment, and half wished that Margaret would come back.
“That is a wide question,” he said.
“Well, you know what I mean,” she said coolly, completely herself again. She was sitting back in her chair now, drawing the paper serenely to and fro between her fingers; and he could see the firelight on her chin and brows, and those steady eyes watching him. He had an impulse of confidence.
“I do think changes are coming,” he said. “I suppose we all do.”
“And you approve?”
“Oh! how can I say off-hand?—But I think changes are needed.”
She was looking down at the fire again now, and did not speak for a moment.
“Master More said you were of the new school,” she said meditatively.
Ralph felt a curious thrill of exultation. Margaret was right then; this girl had been thinking about him.
“There is certainly a stirring,” he said; and his voice was a little restrained.
“Oh, I am not blind or deaf,” said the girl. “Of course, there is a stirring—but I wondered—”
Then Margaret came in with the candles.
Ralph went away that evening more excited than he liked. It seemed as if Mistress Roper’s words had set light to a fire ready laid, and he could perceive the warmth beginning to move about his heart and odd wavering lights flickering on his circumstances and business that had not been there before.
He received his first letter from Beatrice a few weeks later, and it threw him into a strait between his personal and official claims.
Cromwell at this time was exceedingly occupied with quelling the ardour of the House of Lords, who were requesting that the Holy Maid of Kent and her companions might have an opportunity of defending themselves before the Act of Attainder ordered by the King was passed against them; but he found time to tell his agent that trouble was impending over More and Fisher; and to request him to hand in any evidence that he might have against the former.
“I suppose we shall have to let the Bishop off with a fine,” said the minister, “in regard to the Maid’s affair; but we shall catch him presently over the Act; and Mr. More is clear of it. But we shall have him too in a few days. Put down what you have to say, Mr. Torridon, and let me have it this evening.”
And then he rustled off down the staircase to where his carriage was waiting to take him to Westminster, where he proposed to tell the scrupulous peers that the King was not accustomed to command twice, and that to suspect his Grace of wishing them to do an injustice was a piece of insolence that neither himself nor his royal master had expected of them.
Ralph was actually engaged in putting down his very scanty accusations against Sir Thomas More when the letter from Beatrice was brought up to him. He read it through twice in silence; and then ordered the courier to wait below. When the servant had left the room, he read it through a third time.
It was not long; but it was pregnant.
“I entreat you, sir,” wrote the girl, “for the love of Jesu, to let us know if anything is designed against our friend. Three weeks ago you told me it was not so; I pray God that may be true still. I know that you would not lift a finger against him yourself—” (Ralph glanced at his own neat little list at these words, and bit his pen)—“but I wish you to do what you can for him and for us all.” Then followed an erasure.
Ralph carried the paper to the window, flattened it against the panes and read clearly the words, “If my” under the scratching lines, and smiled to himself as he guessed what the sentence was that she was beginning.
Then the letter continued.
“I hear on good authority that there is something against him. He will not escape; and will do nothing on such hearsay, but only tells us to trust God, and laughs at us all. Good Mr. Torridon, do what you can. Your loving friend, B.A.”
Ralph went back from the window where he was still standing, and sat down again, bending his head into his hands. He had no sort of scruples against lying as such or betraying Mr. More’s private conversation; his whole training was directed against such foolishness, and he had learnt at last from Cromwell’s incessant precept and example that the good of the State over-rode all private interests. But he had a disinclination to lie to Beatrice; and he felt simply unable to lose her friendship by telling her the truth.
As he sat there perfectly still, the servant peeped in once softly to see if the answer was ready, and noiselessly withdrew. Ralph did not stir; but still sat on, pressing his eyeballs till they ached and fiery rings twisted before him in the darkness. Then he abruptly sat up, blinked a moment or two, took up a pen, bit it again, and laid it down and sat eyeing the two papers that lay side by side on his desk.
He took up his own list, and read it through. After all, it was very insignificant, and contained no more than minute scraps of conversation that Sir Thomas More had let drop. He had called Queen Katharine “poor woman” three or four times; had expressed a reverence for the Pope of Rome half a dozen times, and had once called him the Vicar of Christ. He had been silent when someone had mentioned Anne Boleyn’s name; he had praised the Carthusians and the Religious Life generally, at some length.
They were the kind of remarks that might mean nothing or a great deal; they were consistent with loyalty; they were not inconsistent with treason; in fact they were exactly the kind of material out of which serious accusations might be manufactured by a skilled hand, though as they stood they proved nothing.
A further consideration to Ralph was his duty to Cromwell; he scarcely felt it seemly to lie whole-heartedly to him; and on the other hand he felt now simply unable to lie to Beatrice. There was only one way out of it,—to prevaricate to them both.
He took up his own paper, glanced at it once more; and then with a slightly dramatic gesture tore it across and across, and threw it on the ground. Then he took up his pen and wrote to Beatrice.
“I have only had access to one paper against our friend—that I have destroyed, though I do not know what Master Cromwell will say. But I tell you this to show at what a price I value your friendship.
“Of course our friend is threatened. Who is not in these days? But I swear to you that I do not know what is the design.”
He added a word or two more for politeness’ sake, prayed that “God might have her in His keeping,” and signed himself as she had done, her “loving friend.”
Then he dried the ink with his pounce box, sealed the letter with great care, and took it down to the courier himself.
He faced Cromwell in the evening with a good deal of terror, but with great adroitness; swore positively that More had said nothing actually treasonable, and had found, on putting pen to paper, that the accusations were flimsier than he thought.
“But it is your business to see that they be not so,” stormed his master. Ralph paused a moment respectfully.
“I cannot make a purse out of a sow’s ear, sir. I must have at least some sort of silk.”
When Cromwell had ceased to walk up and down, Ralph pointed out with considerable shrewdness that he did not suppose that his evidence was going to form the main ground of the attack on More; and that it would merely weaken the position to bring such feeble arguments to bear.
“Why he would tear them to shreds, sir, in five minutes; he would make out that they were our principal grounds—he is a skilled lawyer. If I may dare to say so, Master Cromwell, let your words against Mr. More be few and choice.”
This was bolder speaking than he had ever ventured on before; but Cromwell was in a good humour. The peers had proved tractable and had agreed to pass the attainder against Elizabeth Barton without any more talk of justice and the accused’s right of defence; and he looked now at Ralph with a grim approval.
“I believe you are right, Mr. Torridon. I will think over it.”
A week later the blow fell.
Cromwell looked up at him one Sunday evening as he came into the room, with his papers, and without any greeting spoke at once.
“I wish you to go to Lambeth House to-morrow morning early, Mr. Torridon. Master More is to be there to have the Oath of Succession tendered to him with the others. Do your best to persuade him to take it; be his true friend.”
A little grim amusement shone in his eyes as he spoke. Ralph looked at him a moment.
“I mean it, Mr. Torridon: do your best. I wish him to think you his friend.”
As Ralph went across the Thames in a wherry the following morning, he was still thinking out the situation. Apparently Cromwell wished to keep in friendly touch with More; and this now, of course, was only possible through Ralph, and would have been impossible if the latter’s evidence had been used, or were going to be used. It was a relief to him to know that the consummation of his treachery was postponed at least for the present; (but he would not have called it treachery).
As Lambeth towers began to loom ahead, Ralph took out Beatrice’s letter that had come in answer to his own a few days before, and ran his eyes over it. It was a line of passionate thanks and blessing. Surely he had reached her hidden heart at last. He put the letter back in his inner pocket, just before he stepped ashore. It no doubt would be a useful evidence of his own sincerity in his interview with More.
There was a great crowd in the court as he passed through, for many were being called to take the oath, which, however, was not made strictly legal until the following Second Act in the autumn. Several carriages were drawn up near the house door, and among them Ralph recognised the liveries of his master and of Lord Chancellor Audley. A number of horses and mules too were tethered to rings in the wall on the other side with grooms beside them, and ecclesiastics and secretaries were coming and going, disputing in groups, calling to one another, in the pleasant April sunshine.
On enquiry he found that the Commissioners were sitting in one of the downstair parlours; but one of Cromwell’s servants at the door told him that he was not to go in there, but that Mr. More was upstairs by himself, and that if he pleased he would show him the way.
It was an old room looking on to the garden, scantily furnished, with a patch of carpet by the window and a table and chair set upon it. More turned round from the window-seat on which he was kneeling to look out, and smiled genially as Ralph heard the servant close the door.
“Why, Mr. Torridon, are you in trouble too? This is the detention-room whither I am sent to consider myself.”
He led Ralph, still holding his hand, to the window-seat, where he leaned again looking eagerly into the garden.
“There go the good boys,” he said, “to and fro in the playground; and here sit I. I suppose I have nothing but the rod to look for.”
Ralph felt a little awkward in the presence of this gaiety; and for a minute or two leaned out beside More, staring mechanically at the figures that passed up and down. He had expected almost to find him at his prayers, or at least thoughtfully considering himself.
More commented agreeably on the passers-by.
“Dr. Wilson was here a moment ago; but he is off now, with a man on either side. He too is a naughty fellow like myself, and will not listen to reason. There is the Vicar of Croydon, good man, coming out of the buttery wiping his mouth.”
Ralph looked down at the priest’s flushed excited face; he was talking with a kind of reckless gaiety to a friend who walked beside him.
“He was sad enough just now,” went on the other, “while he was still obstinate; but his master hath patted him on the head now and given him cake and wine. He was calling out for a drink just now (which he hath got, I see) either for gladness or for dryness, or else that we might know quod ille notus erat pontifici.”
Dr. Latimer passed presently, his arms on either side flung round a priest’s neck; he too was talking volubly and laughing; and the skirts of his habit wagged behind him.
“He is in high feather,” said More, “and I have no doubt that his conscience is as clear as his eyes. Come, Mr. Torridon; sit you down. What have you come for?”
Ralph sat back on the window-seat with his back to the light, and his hat between his knees.
“I came to see you, sir; I have not been to the Commissioners. I heard you were here.”
“Why, yes,” said More, “here I am.”
“I came to see if I could be of any use to you, Master More; I know a friend’s face is a good councillor sometimes, even though that friend be a fool.”
More patted him softly on the knee.
“No fool,” he said, “far from it.”
He looked at him so oddly that Ralph feared that he suspected him; so he made haste to bring out Beatrice’s letter.
“Mistress Atherton has written me this,” he said. “I was able to do her a little service—at least I thought it so then.”
More took the letter and glanced at it.
“A very pretty letter,” he said, “and why do you show it me?”
Ralph looked at him steadily.
“Because I am Master Cromwell’s servant; and you never forget it.”
More burst into a fit of laughter; and then took Ralph kindly by the hand.
“You are either very innocent or very deep,” he said. “And what have you come to ask me?”
“I have come to ask nothing, Master More,” said Ralph indignantly, withdrawing his hand—“except to be of service to you.”
“To talk about the oath,” corrected the other placidly. “Very well then. Do you begin, Mr. Torridon.”
Ralph made a great effort, for he was sorely perplexed by Sir Thomas’ attitude, and began to talk, putting all the reasons forward that he could think of for the accepting of the oath. He pointed out that government and allegiance would be impossible things if every man had to examine for himself the claims of his rulers; when vexed and elaborate questions arose—and this certainly was one such—was it not safer to follow the decrees of the King and Parliament, rather than to take up a position of private judgment, and decide upon details of which a subject could have no knowledge? How, too, could More, under the circumstances, take upon himself to condemn those who had subscribed the oath?—he named a few eminent prelates, the Abbot of Westminster and others.
“I do not condemn them,” put in More, who was looking interested.
“Then you are uncertain of the matter?” went on Ralph who had thought out his line of argument with some care.
More assented.
“But your duty to the King’s grace is certain; therefore it should outweigh a thing that is doubtful.”
Sir Thomas sucked in his lower lip, and stared gravely on the young man.
“You are very shrewd, sir,” he said. “I do not know how to answer that at this moment; but I have no reasonable doubt but that there is an answer.”
Ralph was delighted with his advantage, and pursued it eagerly; and after a few minutes had won from More an acknowledgment that he might be willing to consider the taking of the oath itself; it was the other clauses that touched his conscience more. He could swear to be loyal to Anne’s children; but he could not assent to the denunciation of the Pope contained in the preamble of the Act, and the oath would commit him to that.
“But you will tell that to the Commissioners, sir?” asked Ralph eagerly.
“I will tell them all that I have told you,” said More smiling.
Ralph himself was somewhat doubtful as to whether the concession would be accepted; but he professed great confidence, and secretly congratulated himself with having made so much way. But presently a remark of More’s showed that he appreciated the situation.
“I am very grateful to you, Mr. Torridon, for coming and talking to me; and I shall tell my wife and children so. But it is of no use. They are resolved to catch me. First there was the bribe; then the matter of the Maid; then this; and if I took a hundred oaths they would find one more that I could not, without losing my soul; and that indeed I do not propose to do. Quid enim proficit homo?”
There was a knock at the door a moment later, and a servant came in to beg Mr. More to come downstairs again; the Commissioners were ready for him.
“Then good-day, Mr. Torridon. You will come and see me sometimes, even if not at Chelsea. Wherever I may be it will be as nigh heaven as Chelsea.”
Ralph went down with him, and parted from him at the door of the Commissioner’s room; and half-an-hour later a message was sent out to him by Cromwell that he need wait no longer; Mr. More had refused the oath, and had been handed over to the custody of the Abbot of Westminster.
