The Tenth Revelation · Chapter XXIV
"Our Lord looked unto His [wounded] Side, and beheld, rejoicing.... Lo! how I loved thee"
Then with a glad cheer our Lord looked unto His Side and beheld, rejoicing. With His sweet looking He led forth the understanding of His creature by the same wound into His Side within. And then he shewed a fair, delectable place, and large enough for all mankind that shall be saved to rest in peace and in love.[1] And therewith He brought to mind His dearworthy blood and precious water which he let pour all out for love. And with the sweet beholding He shewed His blessed heart even cloven in two.
And with this sweet enjoying, He shewed unto mine understanding, in part, the blessed Godhead, stirring then the poor soul[2] to understand, as it may be said, that is, to think on,[3] the endless Love that was without beginning, and is, and shall be ever. And with this our good Lord said full blissfully: Lo, how that I loved thee, as if He had said: My darling, behold and see thy Lord, thy God that is thy Maker and thine endless joy, see what satisfying and bliss I have in thy salvation; and for my love rejoice [thou] with me.
And also, for more understanding, this blessed word was said: Lo, how I loved thee! Behold and see that I loved thee so much ere I died for thee that I would die for thee; and now I have died for thee and suffered willingly that which I may. And now is all my bitter pain and all my hard travail turned to endless joy and bliss to me and to thee. How should it now be that thou shouldst anything pray that pleaseth me but that I should full gladly grant it thee? For my pleasing is thy holiness and thine endless joy and bliss with me.
This is the understanding, simply as I can say it, of this blessed word: Lo, how I loved thee. This shewed our good Lord for to make us glad and merry.
^ [1] See note on the passage in li., "long and broad, all full of endless heavens"; "He hath, beclosed in Him, all heavens and all joy and bliss."
^ [2] See xiii., "the simplicity of the soul."
^ [3] MS. "that is to mene the endles love."
