Poems 1876-1889 (part 2 of 4)
Lovely the woods, waters, meadows, combes, vales,	All the air things wear that build this world of Wales;	Only the inmate does not correspond:	God, lover of souls, swaying considerate scales,	Complete thy creature dear O where it fails,	Being mighty a master, being a father and fond.
_17 The Loss of the Eurydice
Foundered March 24. 1878_
1	THE Eurydice—it concerned thee, O Lord:	Three hundred souls, O alas! on board,	Some asleep unawakened, all un-	warned, eleven fathoms fallen
2	Where she foundered! One stroke	Felled and furled them, the hearts of oak!	And flockbells off the aerial	Downs' forefalls beat to the burial.
3	For did she pride her, freighted fully, on	Bounden bales or a hoard of bullion?—	Precious passing measure,	Lads and men her lade and treasure.
4	She had come from a cruise, training seamen—	Men, boldboys soon to be men:	Must it, worst weather,	Blast bole and bloom together?
5	No Atlantic squall overwrought her	Or rearing billow of the Biscay water:	Home was hard at hand	And the blow bore from land.
6	And you were a liar, O blue March day.	Bright sun lanced fire in the heavenly bay;	But what black Boreas wrecked her? he	Came equipped, deadly-electric,
7	A beetling baldbright cloud thorough England	Riding: there did storms not mingle? and	Hailropes hustle and grind their	Heavengravel? wolfsnow, worlds of it, wind there?
8	Now Carisbrook keep goes under in gloom;	Now it overvaults Appledurcombe;	Now near by Ventnor town	It hurls, hurls off Boniface Down.
9	Too proud, too proud, what a press she bore!	Royal, and all her royals wore.	Sharp with her, shorten sail!	Too late; lost; gone with the gale.
10	This was that fell capsize,	As half she had righted and hoped to rise	Death teeming in by her portholes	Raced down decks, round messes of mortals.
11	Then a lurch forward, frigate and men;	'All hands for themselves' the cry ran then;	But she who had housed them thither	Was around them, bound them or wound them with her.
12	Marcus Hare, high her captain,	Kept to her—care-drowned and wrapped in	Cheer's death, would follow	His charge through the champ-white water-in-a-wallow.
13	All under Channel to bury in a beach her	Cheeks: Right, rude of feature,	He thought he heard say	'Her commander! and thou too, and thou this way.'
14	It is even seen, time's something server,	In mankind's medley a duty-swerver,	At downright 'No or yes?'	Doffs all, drives full for righteousness.
15	Sydney Fletcher, Bristol-bred,	(Low lie his mates now on watery bed)	Takes to the seas and snows	As sheer down the ship goes.
16	Now her afterdraught gullies him too down;	Now he wrings for breath with the deathgush brown;	Till a lifebelt and God's will	Lend him a lift from the sea-swill.
17	Now he shoots short up to the round air;	Now he gasps, now he gazes everywhere;	But his eye no cliff, no coast or	Mark makes in the rivelling snowstorm.
18	Him, after an hour of wintry waves,	A schooner sights, with another, and saves,	And he boards her in Oh! such joy	He has lost count what came next, poor boy.—
19	They say who saw one sea-corpse cold	He was all of lovely manly mould,	Every inch a tar,	Of the best we boast our sailors are.
20	Look, foot to forelock, how all things suit! he	Is strung by duty, is strained to beauty,	And brown-as-dawning-skinned	With brine and shine and whirling wind.
21	O his nimble finger, his gnarled grip!	Leagues, leagues of seamanship	Slumber in these forsaken	Bones, this sinew, and will not waken.
22	He was but one like thousands more,	Day and night I deplore	My people and born own nation,	Fast foundering own generation,
23	I might let bygones be—our curse	Of ruinous shrine no hand or, worse,	Robbery's hand is busy to	Dress, hoar-hallowed shrines unvisited;
24	Only the breathing temple and fleet	Life, this wildworth blown so sweet,	These daredeaths, ay this crew, in	Unchrist, all rolled in ruin—
25	Deeply surely I need to deplore it,	Wondering why my master bore it,	The riving off that race	So at home, time was, to his truth and grace
26	That a starlight-wender of ours would say	The marvellous Milk was Walsingham Way	And one—but let be, let be:	More, more than was will yet be.—
27	O well wept, mother have lost son;	Wept, wife; wept, sweetheart would be one:	Though grief yield them no good	Yet shed what tears sad truelove should.
28	But to Christ lord of thunder	Crouch; lay knee by earth low under:	'Holiest, loveliest, bravest,	Save my hero, O Hero savest.
29	And the prayer thou hearst me making	Have, at the awful overtaking,	Heard; have heard and granted	Grace that day grace was wanted.'
30	Not that hell knows redeeming,	But for souls sunk in seeming	Fresh, till doomfire burn all,	Prayer shall fetch pity eternal.
18 The May Magnificat
MAY is Mary's month, and I	Muse at that and wonder why:	Her feasts follow reason,	Dated due to season—
Candlemas, Lady Day;	But the Lady Month, May,	Why fasten that upon her,	With a feasting in her honour?
Is it only its being brighter	Than the most are must delight her?	Is it opportunest	And flowers finds soonest?
Ask of her, the mighty mother:	Her reply puts this other	Question: What is Spring?—	Growth in every thing—
Flesh and fleece, fur and feather,	Grass and green world all together;	Star-eyed strawberry-breasted	Throstle above her nested
Cluster of bugle blue eggs thin	Forms and warms the life within;	And bird and blossom swell	In sod or sheath or shell.
All things rising, all things sizing	Mary sees, sympathising	With that world of good,	Nature's motherhood.
Their magnifying of each its kind	With delight calls to mind	How she did in her stored	Magnify the Lord.
Well but there was more than this:	Spring's universal bliss	Much, had much to say	To offering Mary May.
When drop-of-blood-and-foam-dapple	Bloom lights the orchard-apple	And thicket and thorp are merry	With silver-surfed cherry
And azuring-over greybell makes	Wood banks and brakes wash wet like lakes	And magic cuckoocall	Caps, clears, and clinches all—
This ecstacy all through mothering earth	Tells Mary her mirth till Christ's birth	To remember and exultation	In God who was her salvation.
_19 Binsey Poplars
felled 1879_
MY aspens dear, whose airy cages quelled,	Quelled or quenched in leaves the leaping sun,	All felled, felled, are all felled;	Of a fresh and following folded rank	Not spared, not one	That dandled a sandalled	Shadow that swam or sank	On meadow and river and wind-wandering weed-winding	bank.
O if we but knew what we do	When we delve or hew—	Hack and rack the growing green!	Since country is so tender	To touch, her being so slender,	That, like this sleek and seeing ball	But a prick will make no eye at all,	Where we, even where we mean	To mend her we end her,	When we hew or delve:	After-comers cannot guess the beauty been.	Ten or twelve, only ten or twelve	Strokes of havoc unselve	The sweet especial scene,	Rural scene, a rural scene,	Sweet especial rural scene.
20 Duns Scotus's Oxford
TOWERY city and branchy between towers;	Cuckoo-echoing, bell-swarmed, lark-charmed, rook-	racked, river-rounded;	The dapple-eared lily below thee; that country and	town did	Once encounter in, here coped and poised powers;
Thou hast a base and brickish skirt there, sours	That neighbour-nature thy grey beauty is grounded	Best in; graceless growth, thou hast confounded	Rural rural keeping—folk, flocks, and flowers.
Yet ah! this air I gather and I release	He lived on; these weeds and waters, these walls are what	He haunted who of all men most sways my spirits to peace;
Of realty the rarest-veined unraveller; a not	Rivalled insight, be rival Italy or Greece;	Who fired France for Mary without spot.
21 Henry Purcell
The poet wishes well to the divine genius of Purcell and praises him that, whereas other musicians have given utterance to the moods of man's mind, he has, beyond that, uttered in notes the very make and species of man as created both in him and in all men generally.
HAVE fair fallen, O fair, fair have fallen, so dear	To me, so arch-especial a spirit as heaves in Henry Purcell,	An age is now since passed, since parted; with the reversal	Of the outward sentence low lays him, listed to a heresy,	here.
Not mood in him nor meaning, proud fire or sacred fear,	Or love or pity or all that sweet notes not his might nursle:	It is the forged feature finds me; it is the rehearsal	Of own, of abrupt self there so thrusts on, so throngs	the ear.
Let him Oh! with his air of angels then lift me, lay me!	only I'll	Have an eye to the sakes of him, quaint moonmarks, to	his pelted plumage under	Wings: so some great stormfowl, whenever he has walked	his while
The thunder-purple seabeach plume purple-of-thunder,	If a wuthering of his palmy snow-pinions scatter a	colossal smile	Off him, but meaning motion fans fresh our wits with	wonder.
22 Peace
WHEN will you ever, Peace, wild wooddove, shy wings shut,	Your round me roaming end, and under be my boughs?	When, when, Peace, will you, Peace? I'll not play	hypocrite	To own my heart: I yield you do come sometimes; but	That piecemeal peace is poor peace. What pure peace	allows	Alarms of wars, the daunting wars, the death of it?
O surely, reaving Peace, my Lord should leave in lieu	Some good! And so he does leave Patience exquisite,	That plumes to Peace thereafter. And when Peace here	does house	He comes with work to do, he does not come to coo,	He comes to brood and sit.
_23 The Bugler's First Communion
A BUGLER boy from barrack (it is over the hill	There)—boy bugler, born, he tells me, of Irish	Mother to an English sire (he	Shares their best gifts surely, fall how things will),
This very very day came down to us after a boon he on	My late being there begged of me, overflowing	Boon in my bestowing,	Came, I say, this day to it—to a First Communion.
Here he knelt then in regimental red.	Forth Christ from cupboard fetched, how fain I of feet	To his youngster take his treat!	Low-latched in leaf-light housel his too huge godhead.
There! and your sweetest sendings, ah divine,	By it, heavens, befall him! as a heart Christ's darling,	dauntless;	Tongue true, vaunt- and tauntless;	Breathing bloom of a chastity in mansex fine.
Frowning and forefending angel-warder	Squander the hell-rook ranks sally to molest him;	March, kind comrade, abreast him;	Dress his days to a dexterous and starlight order.
How it does my heart good, visiting at that bleak hill,	When limber liquid youth, that to all I teach	Yields tender as a pushed peach,	Hies headstrong to its wellbeing of a self-wise self-will!
Then though I should tread tufts of consolation	Days after, so I in a sort deserve to	And do serve God to serve to	Just such slips of soldiery Christ's royal ration.
Nothing else is like it, no, not all so strains	Us: fresh youth fretted in a bloomfall all portending	That sweet's sweeter ending;	Realm both Christ is heir to and there reigns.
O now well work that sealing sacred ointment!	O for now charms, arms, what bans off bad	And locks love ever in a lad!	Let me though see no more of him, and not disappointment
Those sweet hopes quell whose least me quickenings lift.	In scarlet or somewhere of some day seeing	That brow and bead of being,	An our day's God's own Galahad. Though this child's	drift
Seems by a divine doom channelled, nor do I cry	Disaster there; but may he not rankle and roam	In backwheels though bound home?—	That left to the Lord of the Eucharist, I here lie by;
Recorded only, I have put my lips on pleas	Would brandle adamantine heaven with ride and jar, did	Prayer go disregarded:	Forward-like, but however, and like favourable heaven	heard these.
24 Morning Midday and Evening Sacrifice
THE dappled die-away	Cheek and wimpled lip,	The gold-wisp, the airy-grey	Eye, all in fellowship—	This, all this beauty blooming,	This, all this freshness fuming,	Give God while worth consuming.
Both thought and thew now bolder	And told by Nature: Tower;	Head, heart, hand, heel, and shoulder	That beat and breathe in power—	This pride of prime's enjoyment	Take as for tool, not toy meant	And hold at Christ's employment.
The vault and scope and schooling	And mastery in the mind,	In silk-ash kept from cooling,	And ripest under rind—	What life half lifts the latch of,	What hell stalks towards the snatch of,	Your offering, with despatch, of!
25 Andromeda
Now Time's Andromeda on this rock rude,	With not her either beauty's equal or	Her injury's, looks off by both horns of shore,	Her flower, her piece of being, doomed dragon's food.	Time past she has been attempted and pursued	By many blows and banes; but now hears roar	A wilder beast from West than all were, more	Rife in her wrongs, more lawless, and more lewd.
Her Perseus linger and leave her to her extremes?—	Pillowy air he treads a time and hangs	His thoughts on her, forsaken that she seems,	All while her patience, morselled into pangs,	Mounts; then to alight disarming, no one dreams,	With Gorgon's gear and barebill, thongs and fangs.
26 The Candle Indoors
SOME candle clear burns somewhere I come by.	I muse at how its being puts blissful back	With yellowy moisture mild night's blear-all black,	Or to-fro tender trambeams truckle at the eye.	By that window what task what fingers ply,	I plod wondering, a-wanting, just for lack	Of answer the eagerer a-wanting Jessy or Jack	There God to aggrandise, God to glorify.—
Come you indoors, come home; your fading fire	Mend first and vital candle in close heart's vault:	You there are master, do your own desire;	What hinders? Are you beam-blind, yet to a fault	In a neighbour deft-handed? Are you that liar	And cast by conscience out, spendsavour salt?
_27 The Handsome Heart:
at a Gracious Answer_
'BUT tell me, child, your choice; what shall I buy	You?'—'Father, what you buy me I like best.'	With the sweetest air that said, still plied and pressed,	He swung to his first poised purport of reply.
What the heart is! which, like carriers let fly—	Doff darkness, homing nature knows the rest—	To its own fine function, wild and self-instressed,	Falls light as ten years long taught how to and why.
Mannerly-hearted! more than handsome face—	Beauty's bearing or muse of mounting vein,	All, in this case, bathed in high hallowing grace . . .
Of heaven what boon to buy you, boy, or gain	Not granted?—Only … O on that path you pace	Run all your race, O brace sterner that strain!
_28
At the Wedding March_
GOD with honour hang your head,	Groom, and grace you, bride, your bed	With lissome scions, sweet scions,	Out of hallowed bodies bred.
Each be other's comfort kind:	Deep, deeper than divined,	Divine charity, dear charity,	Fast you ever, fast bind.
Then let the March tread our ears:	I to him turn with tears	Who to wedlock, his wonder wedlock,	Deals triumph and immortal years.
29 Felix Randal
FELIX RANDAL the farrier, O he is dead then? my duty all ended,	Who have watched his mould of man, big-boned and hardy-	handsome	Pining, pining, till time when reason rambled in it and some	Fatal four disorders, fleshed there, all contended?
Sickness broke him. Impatient he cursed at first, but mended	Being anointed and all; though a heavenlier heart began some	Months earlier, since I had our sweet reprieve and ransom	Tendered to him. Ah well, God rest him all road ever he	offended!
This seeing the sick endears them to us, us too it endears.	My tongue had taught thee comfort, touch had quenched thy tears,	Thy tears that touched my heart, child, Felix, poor Felix Randal;
How far from then forethought of, all thy more boisterous years,	When thou at the random grim forge, powerful amidst peers,	Didst fettle for the great grey drayhorse his bright and battering	sandal!
30 Brothers
How lovely the elder brother's	Life all laced in the other's,	Love-laced! what once I well	Witnessed; so fortune fell.	When Shrovetide, two years gone, 5	Our boys' plays brought on	Part was picked for John,	Young John: then fear, then joy	Ran revel in the elder boy.	Their night was come now; all 10	Our company thronged the hall;	Henry, by the wall,	Beckoned me beside him:	I came where called, and eyed him	By meanwhiles; making my play 15	Turn most on tender byplay.	For, wrung all on love's rack,	My lad, and lost in Jack,	Smiled, blushed, and bit his lip;	Or drove, with a diver's dip, 20	Clutched hands down through clasped knees—	Truth's tokens tricks like these,	Old telltales, with what stress	He hung on the imp's success.	Now the other was brass-bold: 25	He had no work to hold	His heart up at the strain;	Nay, roguish ran the vein.	Two tedious acts were past;	Jack's call and cue at last; 30	When Henry, heart-forsook,	Dropped eyes and dared not look.	Eh, how all rung!	Young dog, he did give tongue!	But Harry—in his hands he has flung 35	His tear-tricked cheeks of flame	For fond love and for shame.	Ah Nature, framed in fault,	There 's comfort then, there 's salt;	Nature, bad, base, and blind, 40	Dearly thou canst be kind;	There dearly then, dearly,	I'll cry thou canst be kind.
_31 Spring and Fall:
to a young child_
MARGARET, are you grieving	Over Goldengrove unleaving?	Leaves, like the things of man, you	With your fresh thoughts care for, can you?	Ah! as the heart grows older	It will come to such sights colder	By and by, nor spare a sigh	Though worlds of wanwood leafmeal lie;	And yet you will weep and know why.	Now no matter, child, the name:	Sorrow's springs are the same.	Nor mouth had, no nor mind, expressed	What heart heard of, ghost guessed:	It is the blight man was born for,	It is Margaret you mourn for.
32 Spelt from Sibyl's Leaves
EARNEST, earthless, equal, attuneable, | vaulty, voluminous, . . stupendous Evening strains to be time's vast, | womb-of-all, home-of-all, hearse-of-all night. Her fond yellow hornlight wound to the west, | her wild hollow hoarlight hung to the height Waste; her earliest stars, earl-stars, | stars principal, overbend us, Fire-featuring heaven. For earth | her being has unbound, her dapple is at an end, as- tray or aswarm, all throughther, in throngs; | self in self steeped and pashed—quite Disremembering, dismembering | all now. Heart, you round me right With: Our evening is over us; our night | whelms, whelms, and will end us. Only the beak-leaved boughs dragonish | damask the tool-smooth bleak light; black, Ever so black on it. Our tale, our oracle! | Let life, waned, ah let life wind Off her once skeined stained veined variety | upon, all on two spools; part, pen, pack Now her all in two flocks, two folds—black, white; | right, wrong; reckon but, reck but, mind But these two; ware of a world where but these | two tell, each off the other; of a rack Where, selfwrung, selfstrung, sheathe- and shelterless, | thoughts against thoughts in groans grind.
33 Inversnaid
THIS darksome burn, horseback brown,	His rollrock highroad roaring down,	In coop and in comb the fleece of his foam	Flutes and low to the lake falls home.
A windpuff-bonnet of faawn-froth	Turns and twindles over the broth	Of a pool so pitchblack, fell-frowning,	It rounds and rounds Despair to drowning.
Degged with dew, dappled with dew	Are the groins of the braes that the brook treads through,	Wiry heathpacks, flitches of fern,	And the beadbonny ash that sits over the burn.
What would the world be, once bereft	Of wet and of wildness? Let them be left,	O let them be left, wildness and wet;	Long live the weeds and the wilderness yet.
_34
As kingfishers catch fire, dragonflies draw flame;	As tumbled over rim in roundy wells	Stones ring; like each tucked string tells, each hung bell's	Bow swung finds tongue to fling out broad its name;	Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:	Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;	Selves—goes itself; myself it speaks and spells,	Crying What I do is me: for that I came.
I say more: the just man justices;	Keeps grace: that keeps all his goings graces;	Acts in God's eye what in God's eye he is—	Christ—for Christ plays in ten thousand places,	Lovely in limbs, and lovely in eyes not his	To the Father through the features of men's faces.
35 Ribblesdale
EARTH, sweet Earth, sweet landscape, with leaves throng	And louched low grass, heaven that dost appeal	To, with no tongue to plead, no heart to feel;	That canst but only be, but dost that long—
Thou canst but be, but that thou well dost; strong	Thy plea with him who dealt, nay does now deal,	Thy lovely dale down thus and thus bids reel	Thy river, and o'er gives all to rack or wrong.
And what is Earth's eye, tongue, or heart else, where	Else, but in dear and dogged man?—Ah, the heir	To his own selfbent so bound, so tied to his turn,	To thriftless reave both our rich round world bare	And none reck of world after, this bids wear	Earth brows of such care, care and dear concern.
_36 The Leaden Echo and the Golden Echo
(Maidens' song from St. Winefred's Well)_
## The Leaden Echo
How to keep—is there any any, is there none such, nowhere	known some, bow or brooch or braid or brace, lace, latch	or catch or key to keep	Back beauty, keep it, beauty, beauty, beauty, . . . from vanishing	away?
O is there no frowning of these wrinkles, ranked wrinkles deep,	Down? no waving off of these most mournful messengers, still	messengers, sad and stealing messengers of grey?	No there's none, there's none, O no there's none,	Nor can you long be, what you now are, called fair,	Do what you may do, what, do what you may,	And wisdom is early to despair:	Be beginning; since, no, nothing can be done	To keep at bay	Age and age's evils, hoar hair,	Ruck and wrinkle, drooping, dying, death's worst, winding	sheets, tombs and worms and tumbling to decay;	So be beginning, be beginning to despair.	O there's none; no no no there's none:	Be beginning to despair, to despair,	Despair, despair, despair, despair.
