Poems 1876-1889 (part 3 of 4)
## The Golden Echo
Spare!	There is one, yes I have one (Hush there!);	Only not within seeing of the sun,	Not within the singeing of the strong sun,	Tall sun's tingeing, or treacherous the tainting of the earth's air.	Somewhere elsewhere there is ah well where! one,	One. Yes I can tell such a key, I do know such a place,	Where whatever's prized and passes of us, everything that's	fresh and fast flying of us, seems to us sweet of us and	swiftly away with, done away with, undone,	Undone, done with, soon done with, and yet dearly and	dangerously sweet	Of us, the wimpled-water-dimpled, not-by-morning-matched face,	The flower of beauty, fleece of beauty, too too apt to, ah! to fleet,	Never fleets more, fastened with the tenderest truth	To its own best being and its loveliness of youth: it is an ever-	lastingness of, O it is an all youth!	Come then, your ways and airs and looks, locks, maiden gear,	gallantry and gaiety and grace,	Winning ways, airs innocent, maiden manners, sweet looks,	loose locks, long locks, lovelocks, gaygear, going gallant,	girlgrace—	Resign them, sign them, seal them, send them, motion them	with breath,	And with sighs soaring, soaring sighs deliver	Them; beauty-in-the-ghost, deliver it, early now, long before	death	Give beauty back, beauty, beauty, beauty, back to God, beauty's	self and beauty's giver.	See; not a hair is, not an eyelash, not the least lash lost; every hair	Is, hair of the head, numbered.	Nay, what we had lighthanded left in surly the mere mould	Will have waked and have waxed and have walked with the wind	what while we slept,	This side, that side hurling a heavyheaded hundredfold	What while we, while we slumbered.	O then, weary then why should we tread? O why are we so	haggard at the heart, so care-coiled, care-killed, so fagged,	so fashed, so cogged, so cumbered,	When the thing we freely forfeit is kept with fonder a care,	Fonder a care kept than we could have kept it, kept	Far with fonder a care (and we, we should have lost it) finer, fonder	A care kept. Where kept? Do but tell us where kept, where.—	Yonder.—What high as that! We follow, now we follow.—	Yonder, yes yonder, yonder,	Yonder.
37	The Blessed Virgin compared to the Air we	Breathe
WILD air, world-mothering air,	Nestling me everywhere,	That each eyelash or hair	Girdles; goes home betwixt	The fleeciest, frailest-flixed	Snowflake; that's fairly mixed	With, riddles, and is rife	In every least thing's life;	This needful, never spent,	And nursing element; 10	My more than meat and drink,	My meal at every wink;	This air, which, by life's law,	My lung must draw and draw	Now but to breathe its praise,	Minds me in many ways	Of her who not only	Gave God's infinity	Dwindled to infancy	Welcome in womb and breast, 20	Birth, milk, and all the rest	But mothers each new grace	That does now reach our race—	Mary Immaculate,	Merely a woman, yet	Whose presence, power is	Great as no goddess's	Was deemed, dreamed; who	This one work has to do—	Let all God's glory through, 30	God's glory which would go	Through her and from her flow	Off, and no way but so.
I say that we are wound	With mercy round and round	As if with air: the same	Is Mary, more by name.	She, wild web, wondrous robe,	Mantles the guilty globe,	Since God has let dispense 40	Her prayers his providence:	Nay, more than almoner,	The sweet alms' self is her	And men are meant to share	Her life as life does air.	If I have understood,	She holds high motherhood	Towards all our ghostly good	And plays in grace her part	About man's beating heart, 50	Laying, like air's fine flood,	The deathdance in his blood;	Yet no part but what will	Be Christ our Saviour still.	Of her flesh he took flesh:	He does take fresh and fresh,	Though much the mystery how,	Not flesh but spirit now	And makes, O marvellous!	New Nazareths in us, 60	Where she shall yet conceive	Him, morning, noon, and eve;	New Bethlems, and he born	There, evening, noon, and morn	Bethlem or Nazareth,	Men here may draw like breath	More Christ and baffle death;	Who, born so, comes to be	New self and nobler me	In each one and each one 70	More makes, when all is done,	Both God's and Mary's Son.	Again, look overhead	How air is azured;	O how! nay do but stand	Where you can lift your hand	Skywards: rich, rich it laps	Round the four fingergaps.	Yet such a sapphire-shot,	Charged, steeped sky will not 80	Stain light. Yea, mark you this:	It does no prejudice.	The glass-blue days are those	When every colour glows,	Each shape and shadow shows.	Blue be it: this blue heaven	The seven or seven times seven	Hued sunbeam will transmit	Perfect, not alter it.	Or if there does some soft, 90	On things aloof, aloft,	Bloom breathe, that one breath more	Earth is the fairer for.	Whereas did air not make	This bath of blue and slake	His fire, the sun would shake,	A blear and blinding ball	With blackness bound, and all	The thick stars round him roll	Flashing like flecks of coal, 100	Quartz-fret, or sparks of salt,	In grimy vasty vault.	So God was god of old:	A mother came to mould	Those limbs like ours which are	What must make our daystar	Much dearer to mankind;	Whose glory bare would blind	Or less would win man's mind.	Through her we may see him 110	Made sweeter, not made dim,	And her hand leaves his light	Sifted to suit our sight.	Be thou then, thou dear	Mother, my atmosphere;	My happier world, wherein	To wend and meet no sin;	Above me, round me lie	Fronting my froward eye	With sweet and scarless sky; 120	Stir in my ears, speak there	Of God's love, O live air,	Of patience, penance, prayer:	World-mothering air, air wild,	Wound with thee, in thee isled,	Fold home, fast fold thy child.
38 To what serves Mortal Beauty?
To what serves mortal beauty | dangerous; does set danc-	ing blood the O-seal-that-so | feature, flung prouder form	Than Purcell tune lets tread to? | See: it does this: keeps warm	Men's wits to the things that are; | what good means—where a glance	Master more may than gaze, | gaze out of countenance.	Those lovely lads once, wet-fresh | windfalls of war's storm,	How then should Gregory, a father, | have gleaned else from swarm-	ed Rome? But God to a nation | dealt that day's dear chance.	To man, that needs would worship | block or barren stone,	Our law says: Love what are | love's worthiest, were all known;	World's loveliest—men's selves. Self | flashes off frame and face.	What do then? how meet beauty? | Merely meet it; own,	Home at heart, heaven's sweet gift; | then leave, let that alone.	Yea, wish that though, wish all, | God's better beauty, grace.
39 (The Soldier)
YES. Why do we all, seeing of a soldier, bless him? bless	Our redcoats, our tars? Both these being, the greater part,	But frail clay, nay but foul clay. Here it is: the heart,	Since, proud, it calls the calling manly, gives a guess	That, hopes that, makesbelieve, the men must be no less;	It fancies, feigns, deems, dears the artist after his art;	And fain will find as sterling all as all is smart,	And scarlet wear the spirit of war there express.
Mark Christ our King. He knows war, served this soldiering	through;	He of all can handle a rope best. There he bides in bliss	Now, and seeing somewhere some man do all that man can do,	For love he leans forth, needs his neck must fall on, kiss,	And cry 'O Christ-done deed! So God-made-flesh does too:	Were I come o'er again' cries Christ 'it should be this'.
40 (Carrion Comfort)
NOT, I'll not, carrion comfort, Despair, not feast on thee;	Not untwist—slack they may be—these last strands of man	In me or, most weary, cry I can no more. I can;	Can something, hope, wish day come, not choose not to be.	But ah, but O thou terrible, why wouldst thou rude on me	Thy wring-world right foot rock? lay a lionlimb against	me? scan	With darksome devouring eyes my bruised bones? and fan,	O in turns of tempest, me heaped there; me frantic to	avoid thee and flee?
Why? That my chaff might fly; my grain lie, sheer and clear. Nay in all that toil, that coil, since (seems) I kissed the rod, Hand rather, my heart lo! lapped strength, stole joy, would laugh, cheer. Cheer whom though? the hero whose heaven-handling flung me, foot trod Me? or me that fought him? O which one? is it each one? That night, that year Of now done darkness I wretch lay wrestling with (my God!) my God.
41
No worst, there is none. Pitched past pitch of grief,	More pangs will, schooled at forepangs, wilder wring.	Comforter, where, where is your comforting?	Mary, mother of us, where is your relief?	My cries heave, herds-long; huddle in a main, a chief	Woe, world-sorrow; on an age-old anvil wince and sing—	Then lull, then leave off. Fury had shrieked 'No ling-	ering! Let me be fell: force I must be brief'.
O the mind, mind has mountains; cliffs of fall	Frightful, sheer, no-man-fathomed. Hold them cheap	May who ne'er hung there. Nor does long our small	Durance deal with that steep or deep. Here! creep,	Wretch, under a comfort serves in a whirlwind: all	Life death does end and each day dies with sleep.
_42 Tom's Garland;
upon the Unemployed_
TOM—garlanded with squat and surly steel	Tom; then Tom's fallowbootfellow piles pick	By him and rips out rockfire homeforth—sturdy Dick;	Tom Heart-at-ease, Tom Navvy: he is all for his meal	Sure, 's bed now. Low be it: lustily he his low lot (feel	That ne'er need hunger, Tom; Tom seldom sick,	Seldomer heartsore; that treads through, prickproof,	thick	Thousands of thorns, thoughts) swings though. Common-	weal	Little I reck ho! lacklevel in, if all had bread:	What! Country is honour enough in all us—lordly head,	With heaven's lights high hung round, or, mother-ground	That mammocks, mighty foot. But no way sped,	Nor mind nor mainstrength; gold go garlanded	With, perilous, O no; nor yet plod safe shod sound;	Undenizened, beyond bound	Of earth's glory, earth's ease, all; no one, nowhere,	In wide the world's weal; rare gold, bold steel, bare	In both; care, but share care—	This, by Despair, bred Hangdog dull; by Rage,	Manwolf, worse; and their packs infest the age.
43 Harry Ploughman
HARD as hurdle arms, with a broth of goldish flue	Breathed round; the rack of ribs; the scooped flank; lank	Rope-over thigh; knee-nave; and barrelled shank—	Head and foot, shoulder and shank—	By a grey eye's heed steered well, one crew, fall to;	Stand at stress. Each limb's barrowy brawn, his thew	That onewhere curded, onewhere sucked or sank—	Soared or sank—,	Though as a beechbole firm, finds his, as at a roll-	call, rank	And features, in flesh, what deed he each must do—	His sinew-service where do.
He leans to it, Harry bends, look. Back, elbow, and	liquid waist	In him, all quail to the wallowing o' the plough:	's cheek crimsons; curls	Wag or crossbridle, in a wind lifted, windlaced—	See his wind- lilylocks -laced;	Churlsgrace, too, child of Amansstrength, how it hangs	or hurls	Them—broad in bluff hide his frowning feet lashed! raced	With, along them, cragiron under and cold furls—	With-a-fountain's shining-shot furls.
44
To seem the stranger lies my lot, my life	Among strangers. Father and mother dear,	Brothers and sisters are in Christ not near	And he my peace my parting, sword and strife.	England, whose honour O all my heart woos, wife	To my creating thought, would neither hear	Me, were I pleading, plead nor do I: I wear-	y of idle a being but by where wars are rife.
I am in Ireland now; now I am at a third	Remove. Not but in all removes I can	Kind love both give and get. Only what word	Wisest my heart breeds dark heaven's baffling ban	Bars or hell's spell thwarts. This to hoard unheard,	Heard unheeded, leaves me a lonely began.
45
I WAKE and feel the fell of dark, not day.	What hours, O what black houers we have spent	This night! what sights you, heart, saw; ways you went!	And more must, in yet longer light's delay.	With witness I speak this. But where I say	Hours I mean years, mean life. And my lament	Is cries countless, cries like dead letters sent	To dearest him that lives alas! away.
I am gall, I am heartburn. God's most deep decree	Bitter would have me taste: my taste was me;	Bones built in me, flesh filled, blood brimmed the curse.	Selfyeast of spirit a dull dough sours. I see	The lost are like this, and their scourge to be	As I am mine, their sweating selves; but worse.
46
PATIENCE, hard thing! the hard thing but to pray,	But bid for, Patience is! Patience who asks	Wants war, wants wounds; weary his times, his tasks;	To do without, take tosses, and obey.	Rare patience roots in these, and, these away,	Nowhere. Natural heart's ivy, Patience masks	Our ruins of wrecked past purpose. There she basks	Purple eyes and seas of liquid leaves all day.
We hear our hearts grate on themselves: it kills	To bruise them dearer. Yet the rebellious wills	Of us we do bid God bend to him even so.	And where is he who more and more distils	Delicious kindness?—He is patient. Patience fills	His crisp combs, and that comes those ways we know.
47
MY own heart let me have more pity on; let	Me live to my sad self hereafter kind,	Charitable; not live this tormented mind	With this tormented mind tormenting yet.	I cast for comfort I can no more get	By groping round my comfortless, than blind	Eyes in their dark can day or thirst can find	Thirst's all-in-all in all a world of wet.
Soul, self; come, poor Jackself, I do advise	You, jaded, let be; call off thoughts awhile	Elsewhere; leave comfort root-room; let joy size	At God knows when to God knows what; whose smile	's not wrung, see you; unforeseen times rather—as skies	Betweenpie mountains—lights a lovely mile.
48 That Nature is a Heraclitean Fire and of the comfort of the Resurrection
CLOUD-PUFFBALL, torn tufts, tossed pillows | flaunt forth, then	chevy on an air-	built thoroughfare: heaven-roysterers, in gay-gangs | they throng;	they glitter in marches.	Down roughcast, down dazzling whitewash, | wherever an elm	arches,	Shivelights and shadowtackle in long | lashes lace, lance, and pair.	Delightfully the bright wind boisterous | ropes, wrestles, beats	earth bare	Of yestertempest's creases; in pool and rut peel parches	Squandering ooze to squeezed | dough, crust, dust; stanches,	starches	Squadroned masks and manmarks | treadmire toil there	Footfretted in it. Million-fueled, | nature's bonfire burns on.	But quench her bonniest, dearest | to her, her clearest-selved spark	Man, how fast his firedint, | his mark on mind, is gone!	Both are in an unfathomable, all is in an enormous dark	Drowned. O pity and indig | nation! Manshape, that shone	Sheer off, disseveral, a star, | death blots black out; nor mark	Is any of him at all so stark	But vastness blurs and time | beats level. Enough! the Resur-	rection,	A heart's-clarion! Away grief's gasping, | joyless days, dejection.	Across my foundering deck shone	A beacon, an eternal beam. | Flesh fade, and mortal trash	Fall to the residuary worm; | world's wildfire, leave but ash:	In a flash, at a trumpet crash,	I am all at once what Christ is, | since he was what I am, and	This Jack, joke, poor potsherd, | patch, matchwood, immortal	diamond,	Is immortal diamond.
49	In honour of	St. Alphonsus Rodriguez	Laybrother of the Society of Jesus
HONOUR is flashed off exploit, so we say;	And those strokes once that gashed flesh or galled shield	Should tongue that time now, trumpet now that field,	And, on the fighter, forge his glorious day.	On Christ they do and on the martyr may;	But be the war within, the brand we wield	Unseen, the heroic breast not outward-steeled,	Earth hears no hurtle then from fiercest fray.
Yet God (that hews mountain and continent,	Earth, all, out; who, with trickling increment,	Veins violets and tall trees makes more and more)	Could crowd career with conquest while there went	Those years and years by of world without event	That in Majorca Alfonso watched the door.
50
Justus quidem tu es, Domine, si disputem tecum: verum- tamen justa loquar ad te: Quare via impiorum prospera- tur? &c.
THOU art indeed just, Lord, if I contend	With thee; but, sir, so what I plead is just.	Why do sinners' ways prosper? and why must	Disappointment all I endeavour end?
Wert thou my enemy, O thou my friend,	How wouldst thou worse, I wonder, than thou dost	Defeat, thwart me? Oh, the sots and thralls of lust	Do in spare hours more thrive than I that spend,	Sir, life upon thy cause. See, banks and brakes	Now, leaved how thick! laced they are again	With fretty chervil, look, and fresh wind shakes	Them; birds build—but not I build; no, but strain,	Time's eunuch, and not breed one work that wakes.	Mine, O thou lord of life, send my roots rain.
51 To R. B.
THE fine delight that fathers thought; the strong	Spur, live and lancing like the blowpipe flame,	Breathes once and, quenched faster than it came,	Leaves yet the mind a mother of immortal song.	Nine months she then, nay years, nine years she long	Within her wears, bears, cares and moulds the same:	The widow of an insight lost she lives, with aim	Now known and hand at work now never wrong.	Sweet fire the sire of muse, my soul needs this;	I want the one rapture of an inspiration.	O then if in my lagging lines you miss	The roll, the rise, the carol, the creation,	My winter world, that scarcely breathes that bliss	Now, yields you, with some sighs, our explanation.
UNFINISHED POEMS & FRAGMENTS
52 Summa
THE best ideal is the true	And other truth is none.	All glory be ascribed to	The holy Three in One.
53
WHAT being in rank-old nature should earlier have that	breath been	That here personal tells off these heart-song powerful	peals?—	A bush-browed, beetle-browed billow is it?	With a south-westerly wind blustering, with a tide rolls	reels	Of crumbling, fore-foundering, thundering all-surfy seas	in; seen	Underneath, their glassy barrel, of a fairy green.	. . . . . . . .	Or a jaunting vaunting vaulting assaulting trumpet telling
_54	On the Portrait of Two Beautiful	Young People
A Brother and Sister_
O I admire and sorrow! The heart's eye grieves	Discovering you, dark tramplers, tyrant years.	A juice rides rich through bluebells, in vine leaves,	And beauty's dearest veriest vein is tears.
Happy the father, mother of these! Too fast:	Not that, but thus far, all with frailty, blest	In one fair fall; but, for time's aftercast,	Creatures all heft, hope, hazard, interest.
And are they thus? The fine, the fingering beams	Their young delightful hour do feature down	That fleeted else like day-dissolved dreams	Or ringlet-race on burling Barrow brown.
She leans on him with such contentment fond	As well the sister sits, would well the wife;	His looks, the soul's own letters, see beyond,	Gaze on, and fall directly forth on life.
But ah, bright forelock, cluster that you are	Of favoured make and mind and health and youth,	Where lies your landmark, seamark, or soul's star?	There's none but truth can stead you. Christ is truth.
There's none but good can be good, both for you	And what sways with you, maybe this sweet maid;	None good but God—a warning waved to	One once that was found wanting when Good weighed.
Man lives that list, that leaning in the will	No wisdom can forecast by gauge or guess,	The selfless self of self, most strange, most still,	Fast furled and all foredrawn to No or Yes.
Your feast of; that most in you earnest eye	May but call on your banes to more carouse.	Worst will the best. What worm was here, we cry,	To have havoc-pocked so, see, the hung-heavenward	boughs?
Enough: corruption was the world's first woe.	What need I strain my heart beyond my ken?	O but I bear my burning witness though	Against the wild and wanton work of men.	. . . . . . .
55
THE sea took pity: it interposed with doom:	'I have tall daughters dear that heed my hand:	Let Winter wed one, sow them in her womb,	And she shall child them on the New-world strand.'	. . . . . . . .
56 (Ash-boughs)
a.
NOT of all my eyes see, wandering on the world,	Is anything a milk to the mind so, so sighs deep	Poetry to it, as a tree whose boughs break in the sky.	Say it is ashboughs: whether on a December day and	furled	Fast or they in clammyish lashtender combs creep	Apart wide and new-nestle at heaven most high.	They touch heaven, tabour on it; how their talons sweep	The smouldering enormous winter welkin! May	Mells blue and snowwhite through them, a fringe and fray	Of greenery: it is old earth's groping towards the steep	Heaven whom she childs us by.
(Variant from line 7.) b.
They touch, they tabour on it, hover on it[; here, there	hurled],	With talons sweep	The smouldering enormous winter welkin. [Eye,	But more cheer is when] May	Mells blue with snowwhite through their fringe and fray	Of greenery and old earth gropes for, grasps at steep	Heaven with it whom she childs things by.
57
. . . . . . . .	HOPE holds to Christ the mind's own mirror out	To take His lovely likeness more and more.	It will not well, so she would bring about	An ever brighter burnish than before	And turns to wash it from her welling eyes	And breathes the blots off all with sighs on sighs.	Her glass is blest but she as good as blind	Holds till hand aches and wonders what is there;	Her glass drinks light, she darkles down behind,	All of her glorious gainings unaware.	. . . . . . . .	I told you that she turned her mirror dim	Betweenwhiles, but she sees herself not Him.	. . . . . . . .
