Jesuits and Jansenists (part 3 of 3)
A point of form.—When Saint Peter and the apostles consulted about the abolition of circumcision, when it was a question of acting in contradiction to the law of God, they did not consult the prophets, but considered simply the reception of the Holy Spirit in the persons uncircumcised. They judged it more certain that God approved those whom he filled with his spirit, than it was that the law must be observed.
They knew that the end of the Law was none other than the Holy Spirit, and thus as men certainly had this without circumcision, circumcision was not needful.
But to preserve pre-eminence to himself he gives prayer to whom he pleases.
Why God has established prayer.
1. To communicate to his creatures the dignity of causality.
2. To teach us from whom our virtue comes.
3. To make us deserve other virtues by work.
Objection. But we believe that prayer comes from ourselves.
This is absurd, for since before we have faith, we cannot have virtues, how should we have faith? Is there a greater distance between infidelity and faith than between faith and virtue?
Merit. This word is ambiguous.
Meruit habere Redemptorem.
Meruit tam sacra membra tangere.
Digna tam sacra membra tangere.
Non sum dignus, qui manducat indignus.
Dignus est accipere.
Dignare me.
God is only bound according to his promises.
He has promised to do justice to prayer, he has never promised prayer only to the children of promise.
Si does not mark indifference. Malachi, Isaiah.
Isaiah. Si volumus, etc.
In quacumque die.
Ne timeas, pusillus grex. Timore et tretmore.—Quid ergo? Ne timeas, modo timeas.
Fear not, provided you fear, but if you fear not, then fear.
Qui me recipit, non me recipit, sed eum qui me misit.
Nemo scit neque Filius.
Nubes lucida obumbravit.
Saint John was to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and Jesus Christ was to sow division. In this there is no contradiction.
The effects in communi and in particulari. The semi-Pelagians err in saying of in communi what is true only in particulari, and the Calvinists in saying in particulari what is true in communi. So it seems to me.
Saint Augustine has said expressly that power would be taken away from the righteous. But it is by chance that he said it, for it might have been that the chance of saying it did not occur. But his principles make us see that when the occasion for it presented itself, it was impossible he should not say so, or that he should say anything to the contrary. It is then rather that he was forced to say it, when the occasion offered itself, than that he said it, the occasion having offered itself, the one being of necessity, the other of chance. But the two are all that we could ask.
The end. Are we certain? Is this principle certain? Let us examine.
The testimony of a man's self is naught Saint Thomas.
The image alone of all these mysteries has been openly showed to the Jews and by Saint John the forerunner, and then the other mysteries, to mark that in each man as in the world at large this order must be observed.
It is, in technical language, wholly the body of Jesus Christ, but it cannot be said to be the whole body of Jesus Christ.
The union of two things without change cannot enable us to say that one becomes the other.
Thus the soul is united to the body, the fire to the fuel, without change.
But change is necessary to make the form of the one become the form of the other.
Thus the union of the Word to man.
Because my body without my soul would not make the body of a man, then my soul united to any matter whatsoever would make my body.
It distinguishes for me the necessary condition with a sufficient condition, the union is necessary, but not sufficient.
The left arm is not the right.
Impenetrability is a property of matter.
Identity of number in regard to the same time requires the identity of matter.
Thus if God united my soul to a body in China, the same body, idem numero would be in China.
The same river which runs there is idem numero as that which runs at the same time in China.
