2	Three kings.... Viz., Cambyses, Smerdes Magus, and Darius, the son of Hystaspes.—Ibid. The fourth.... Xerxes.
3	A strong king.... Alexander.
5	The king of the south.... Ptolemeus the son of Lagus, king of Egypt, which lies south of Jerusalem.—Ibid. One of his princes.... that is, one of Alexander’s princes, shall prevail over him: that is, shall be stronger than the king of Egypt. He speaks of Seleucus Nicator, king of Asia and Syria, whose successors are here called the kings of the north, because their dominions lay to the north in respect to Jerusalem.
6	The daughter of the king of the south.... Viz., Berenice, daughter of Ptolemeus Philadelphus, given in marriage to Antiochus Theos, grandson of Seleucus.
7	A plant, etc.... Ptolemeus Evergetes, the son of Philadelphus.
8	The king of the north.... Seleucus Callinicus.
10	His sons.... Seleucus Ceraunius, and Antiochus the Great, the sons of Callinicus.—Ibid. He shall come.... Viz., Antiochus the Great.
11	The king of the south.... Ptolemeus Philopator, son of Evergetes.
16	He shall come upon him.... Viz., Antiochus shall come upon the king of the south.—Ibid. The glorious land.... Judea.
17	All his kingdom.... Viz., all the kingdom of Ptolemeus Epiphanes, son of Philopator.—Ibid. A daughter of women.... That is, a most beautiful woman, viz., his daughter Cleopatra.—Ibid. To overthrow it.... Viz., the kingdom of Epiphanes: but his policy shall not succeed; for Cleopatra shall take more to heart the interest of her husband, than that of her father.
18	The prince of his reproach.... Seipio the Roman general, called the prince of his reproach, because he overthrew Antiochus, and obliged him to submit to very dishonourable terms, before he would cease from the war.
20	One most vile.... Seleucus Philopator, who sent Heliodorus to plunder the temple: and was shortly after slain by the same Heliodorus.
21	One despised.... Viz., Antiochus Epiphanes, who at first was despised and not received for king. What is here said of this prince, is accommodated by St. Jerome and others to Antichrist; of whom this Antiochus was a figure.
22	Of the fighter.... That is, of them that shall oppose him, and shall fight against him.—Ibid. The prince of the covenant.... or, of the league. The chief of them that conspired against him: or the king of Egypt his most powerful adversary.
25	The king.... Ptolemeus Philometor.
30	The galleys and the Romans.... Popilius, and the other Roman ambassadors, who came in galleys, and obliged him to depart from Egypt.
31	They shall place there the abomination, etc.... The idol of Jupiter Olympius, which Antiochus ordered to be set up in the sanctuary of the temple: which is here called the sanctuary of strength, from the Almighty that was worshipped there.
38	The god Maozim.... That is, the god of forces or strong holds.
39	And he shall increase glory, etc.... He shall bestow honours, riches and lands, upon them that shall worship his god.
45	Apadno.... Some take it for the proper name of a place: others, from the Hebrew, translate it his palace.
