Chap. XXIII. Of the present state of the English nation, or of all Britain. [725-731 a.d.]
In the year of our Lord 725, being the seventh year of Osric,996 king of the Northumbrians, who had succeeded Coenred, Wictred,997 the son of Egbert, king of Kent, died on the 23rd of April, and left his three sons, Ethelbert, Eadbert, and Alric,998 heirs of that kingdom, which he had governed thirty-four years and a half. The next year Tobias,999 bishop of the church of Rochester, died, a most learned man, as has been said before; for he was disciple to those masters of blessed memory, Theodore, the archbishop, and Abbot Hadrian, wherefore, as has been said, besides having a great knowledge of letters both ecclesiastical and general, he learned both the Greek and Latin tongues to such perfection, that they were as well known and familiar to him as his native language. He was buried in the chapel of St. Paul the Apostle, which he had built within the church of St. Andrew1000 for his own place of burial. After him Aldwulf1001 took upon him the office of bishop, having been consecrated by Archbishop Bertwald.
In the year of our Lord 729, two comets appeared about the sun, to the great terror of the beholders. One of them went before the sun in the morning at his rising, the other followed him when he set in the evening, as it were presaging dire disaster to both east and west; or without doubt one was the forerunner of the day, and the other of the night, to signify that mortals were threatened with calamities at both times. They carried their flaming brands towards the north, as it were ready to kindle a conflagration. They appeared in January, and continued nearly a fortnight. At which time a grievous blight fell upon Gaul, in that it was laid waste by the Saracens with cruel bloodshed; but not long after in that country they received the due reward of their unbelief.1002 In that year the holy man of God, Egbert, departed to the Lord, as has been said above, on Easter day;1003 and immediately after Easter, that is, on the 9th of May, Osric,1004 king of the Northumbrians, departed this life, after he had reigned eleven years, and appointed Ceolwulf,1005 brother to Coenred,1006 who had reigned before him, his successor; the beginning and progress of whose reign have been so filled with many and great commotions and conflicts, that it cannot yet be known what is to be said concerning them, or what end they will have.
In the year of our Lord 731, Archbishop Bertwald died of old age, on the 13th of January, having held his see thirty-seven years, six months and fourteen days.1007 In his stead, the same year, Tatwine,1008 of the province of the Mercians, was made archbishop, having been a priest in the monastery called Briudun.1009 He was consecrated in the city of Canterbury by the venerable men, Daniel,1010 bishop of Winchester, Ingwald of London,1011 Aldwin of Lichfield,1012 and Aldwulf of Rochester,1013 on Sunday, the 10th of June, being a man renowned for piety and wisdom, and of notable learning in Holy Scripture.
Thus at the present time,1014 the bishops Tatwine and Aldwulf preside in the churches of Kent; Ingwald is bishop in the province of the East Saxons. In the province of the East Angles, the bishops are Aldbert and Hadulac;1015 in the province of the West Saxons, Daniel and Forthere;1016 in the province of the Mercians, Aldwin.1017 Among those peoples who dwell beyond the river Severn to the westward,1018 Walhstod is bishop; in the province of the Hwiccas, Wilfrid;1019 in the province of Lindsey, Bishop Cynibert1020 presides; the bishopric of the Isle of Wight1021 belongs to Daniel, bishop of the city of Winchester. The province of the South Saxons,1022 having now continued some years without a bishop, receives episcopal ministrations from the prelate of the West Saxons. All these provinces, and the other southern provinces, as far as the boundary formed by the river Humber, with their several kings, are subject to King Ethelbald.1023
But in the province of the Northumbrians, where King Ceolwulf reigns, four bishops now preside; Wilfrid1024 in the church of York, Ethelwald1025 in that of Lindisfarne, Acca1026 in that of Hagustald, Pecthelm1027 in that which is called the White House, which, as the number of the faithful has increased, has lately become an episcopal see, and has him for its first prelate. The Pictish people also at this time are at peace with the English nation, and rejoice in having their part in Catholic peace and truth with the universal Church. The Scots1028 that inhabit Britain, content with their own territories, devise no plots nor hostilities against the English nation. The Britons,1029 though they, for the most part, as a nation hate and oppose the English nation, and wrongfully, and from wicked lewdness, set themselves against the appointed Easter of the whole Catholic Church; yet, inasmuch as both Divine and human power withstand them, they can in neither purpose prevail as they desire; for though in part they are their own masters, yet part of them are brought under subjection to the English. In these favourable times of peace and calm,1030 many of the Northumbrians, as well of the nobility as private persons, laying aside their weapons, and receiving the tonsure, desire rather both for themselves and their children to take upon them monastic vows, than to practise the pursuit of war. What will be the end hereof, the next age will see. This is for the present the state of all Britain; about two hundred and eighty-five years after the coming of the English into Britain, and in the 731st year of our Lord, in Whose kingdom that shall have no end let the earth rejoice; and Britain being one with them in the joy of His faith, let the multitude of isles be glad, and give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness.
