Continuation (part 1 of 9)
The Continuation of Bede.1056
In the year 731 King Ceolwulf was taken prisoner, and tonsured, and sent back to his kingdom; Bishop Acca was driven from his see.
In the year 732, Egbert1057 was made Bishop of York, in the room of Wilfrid.
[Cynibert Bishop of Lindsey died.]
[In the year of our Lord 733, Archbishop Tatwine, having received the pall by Apostolic authority, ordained Alwic1058 and Sigfrid,1059 bishops.]
In the year 733, there was an eclipse of the sun on the 14th day of August about the third hour, in such wise that the whole orb of the sun seemed to be covered with a black and gloomy shield.
In the year 734, the moon, on the 31st of January, about the time of cock-crowing, was, for about a whole hour, coloured blood-red, after which a blackness followed, and she regained her wonted light.
In the year from the Incarnation of Christ, 734, bishop Tatwine died.
In the year 735, Nothelm was ordained archbishop; and bishop Egbert, having received the pall from the Apostolic see, was the first to be established as archbishop1060 after Paulinus, and he ordained Frithbert,1061 and Frithwald1062 bishops; and the priest Bede died.1063
In the year 737, an excessive drought rendered the land unfruitful; and Ceolwulf, voluntarily receiving the tonsure, left the kingdom to Eadbert.1064
In the year 739, Edilhart,1065 king of the West-Saxons, died, as did Archbishop Nothelm.
In the year 740, Cuthbert1066 was consecrated in Nothelm's stead. Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, cruelly and wrongfully wasted part of Northumbria, their king, Eadbert, with his army, being employed against the Picts. Bishop Ethelwald died also, and Conwulf,1067 was consecrated in his stead. Arnwin1068 and Eadbert1069 were slain.
In the year 741, a great drought came upon the country. Charles,1070 king of the Franks, died; and his sons, Caroloman and Pippin,1071 reigned in his stead.
In the year 745, Bishop Wilfrid and Ingwald, Bishop of London, departed to the Lord.
In the year 747, the man of God, Herefrid,1072 died.
In the year 750, Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, rose up against king Ethelbald and Oengus; Theudor and Eanred died; Eadbert added the plain of Kyle and other places to his dominions.1073
In the year 753, in the fifth year of King Eadbert, on the 9th of January,1074 an eclipse of the sun came to pass; afterwards, in the same year and month, on the 24th day of January, the moon suffered an eclipse, being covered with a gloomy, black shield, in like manner as was the sun a little while before.
In the year 754, Boniface,1075 called also Winfrid, Bishop of the Franks, received the crown of martyrdom, together with fifty-three others; and Redger was consecrated archbishop in his stead, by pope Stephen.
In the year 757, Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, was treacherously and miserably murdered, in the night, by his own guards; Beornred1076 began his reign; Cyniwulf,1077 king of the West Saxons, died; and the same year, Offa, having put Beornred to flight, sought to gain the kingdom of the Mercians by bloodshed.
In the year 758, Eadbert, king of the Northumbrians, receiving St. Peter's tonsure for the love of God, and to the end that he might take the heavenly country by force,1078 left the kingdom to his son Oswulf.
In the year 755, Oswulf was wickedly murdered by his own thegns; and Ethelwald, being chosen the same year by his people, entered upon the kingdom; in whose second year there was great tribulation by reason of pestilence, which continued almost two years, divers grievous sicknesses raging, but more especially the disease of dysentery.
In the year 761, Oengus,1079 king of the Picts, died; who, from the beginning to the end of his reign, continued to be a blood-stained and tyrannical butcher; Oswin1080 was also slain.
In the year 765, King Aluchred came to the throne.1081
In the year 766 a.d., Archbishop Egbert, of the royal race, and endued with divine knowledge, as also Frithbert, both of them truly faithful bishops, departed to the Lord.
## Notes
^ 1.
^ The St. Gallen MS. (ninth century) has, however, “VII Id. Mai.” Messrs. Mayor and Lumby, adopting this reading, place his death as late as 742, in which year the eve of Ascension Day fell on May 9th. For their argument, v. Mayor and Lumby, pp. 401, 402.
^ 2.
^ The phrase is the present Bishop of Oxford's in “Studies in the Christian Character.”
^ 3.
^ Stevenson, “Church Historians,” vol. i.
^ 4.
^ From Easter to Whitsuntide.
^ 5.
^ Rogation Wednesday.
^ 6.
^ King of Northumbria, cf. V, 23. He succeeded Osric, 729 a.d. In a revolt he was forcibly tonsured, 731, but restored. He voluntarily became a monk in Lindisfarne in 737. The fact that Bede submitted the Ecclesiastical History to him for revision bears witness to his piety and learning.
^ 7.
^ Albinus, the first English abbot of the monastery of SS. Peter and Paul at Canterbury, succeeded Hadrian in 709 or 710. On his scholarship, cf. V, 20.
^ 8.
^ Theodore, the great archbishop, noted for his organization of the English Church and his services to education, consecrated in 668, at the age of sixty-five, by Pope Vitalian, on the recommendation of Hadrian, who had himself twice declined the office of archbishop. Theodore was a native of Tarsus, in Cilicia, a man of great learning and scholarly attainments. Cf. IV, 1.
^ 9.
^ Hadrian (v. previous note, cf. IV, 1), an African by birth, sent to England by Pope Vitalian along with Theodore, became Abbot of SS. Peter and Paul, Canterbury. He co-operated with Theodore in his educational work.
^ 10.
^ A presbyter of London, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, 735. Received the pallium (v. I, 27, p. 54, note) in 736.
^ 11.
^ Gregory I (the Great), who sent the Roman mission to England.
^ 12.
^ Gregory II, v. Plummer ad loc. for arguments showing conclusively that Gregory III cannot be meant.
^ 13.
^ Cf. IV, 16, and V, 18. In V, 23 he is more accurately described as “Ventanus antistes.” He was consecrated Bishop of Winchester when the West Saxon bishopric was divided in 705; and his diocese comprised only the smaller part of Wessex. He was the friend and counsellor of St. Boniface.
^ 14.
^ Bishop of the East Saxons, cf. III, 21 foll.
^ 15.
^ St. Chad, Bishop of the Northumbrians, afterwards of Lichfield; brother of Cedd: v. III, 23, 28; IV, 2, 3; V, 19.
^ 16.
^ Lastingham, near Pickering in Yorkshire N.R., v. III, 23.
^ 17.
^ Nothing further is known of him.
^ 18.
^ The district to the north of the Wash.
^ 19.
^ Bishop of Sidnacester, in the province of Lindsey. He died in 732: v. IV, 12; V, 23.
^ 20.
^ The saint and hermit who was for two years Bishop of Lindisfarne, 685-687: v. IV, 26-32. Bede wrote his life both in prose and verse.
^ 21.
^ Holy Island, off the coast of Northumberland. Aidan chose it as the place of his see and monastery in 635: v. III, 3.
^ 22.
^ This total varies in different authors. The first few pages of Bede are to a great extent copied out of Pliny, Solinus, Orosius, and Gildas.
^ 23.
^ Richborough, Kent.
^ 24.
^ Boulogne.
^ 25.
^ Cf. Caes., B.G., passim; Verg., Aen., VIII, 727.
^ 26.
^ In his Hexameron.
^ 27.
^ Latin is included as being the ecclesiastical language common to all. Bede does not imply that there was a Latin-speaking race still in the island.
^ 28.
^ In Caesar's time, the whole district lying along the north-western coast of Gaul, afterwards narrowed down to the modern Brittany. That the Britons (or Brythons) came from Gaul is doubtless a fact. Another branch of the Celtic race, the Goidels or Gaels, appears to have been in possession in Britain before them.
^ 29.
^ By Scythia Bede means Scandinavia. He only mentions this account as a tradition. The problem of the Picts has not been solved yet. According to one view, they belonged to the pre-Aryan inhabitants of Britain, pushed westward and northward by the Celtic invaders. In Scotland they held their own for a considerable time in a wide tract of country, and they may have to some extent amalgamated with the Celts who dispossessed them (Rhŷs). Others regard them as Celts of the same branch as Welsh, Cornish, and Britons, being probably nearest to Cornish. The absence of all but the scantiest remains of their language makes the question of their origin one of great difficulty.
^ 30.
^ The legend is an attempt to account for the law of Pictish succession, which was vested in the mother, v. Rhŷs, “Celtic Britain,” pp. 170-171.
^ 31.
^ “Dal,” a division or part, is common in Irish names. Dalriada was a district in the north-eastern part of Ulster. From there, a tribe of Scots (a Celtic race who settled in Ireland at some unknown period) came to Kintyre and spread along the coasts of Argyll, which took from them the name of Dalriada (probably circ. 500 a.d.). They brought the Christian religion with them. Bede follows that version of the legend which makes Cairbre Riada, the eponymous hero of the Irish Dalriada (circ. 200 a.d.), himself found the colony in Scotland.
^ 32.
^ Dumbarton; v. infra c. 12, p. 24 and note.
^ 33.
^ Caesar's invasion took place a.u.c. 699 and 700; b.c. 55 and 54.
^ 34.
^ Cf. Caes., B.G., V, 11, 18 ff. A powerful British chief. His territory lay north and north-east of the Thames, roughly comprising Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Berkshire, but the exact limits are uncertain. His people were the Catuvellauni (the name is Gaulish in form).
^ 35.
^ Cf. Caes., B.G., V, 20. The Trinovantes occupied Essex and part of Middlesex.
^ 36.
^ Variations of this name given by ancient authors are Andragius and Androgorius. Caesar calls him Mandubracius.
^ 37.
^ The position of this place is unknown.
^ 38.
^ Claudius came to Britain a.u.c. 796, 43 a.d.
^ 39.
^ He can only have done so in name; it was probably Agricola who first conquered the Orkneys. Cf. Tac., Agric., 10.
^ 40.
^ Cf. Tac., Agric., 13.
^ 41.
^ Marcus Antoninus Verus, commonly called Marcus Aurelius, succeeded in 161 a.d. His colleague in the empire was his adopted brother, Lucius Verus, whose full adoptive name was Lucius Aurelius Antoninus Verus Commodus. He died in 169. Eleutherus became Pope between 171 and 177. Bede's chronology is therefore wrong.
^ 42.
^ Most modern authorities consider the story fabulous. But cf. Bright, “Early English Church History,” pp. 3-5.
^ 43.
^ Severus succeeded in 193 a.d. He died in 211.
^ 44.
^ This is the earthwork which runs parallel to the wall of Hadrian, between the Solway and the Tyne, at an interval of from 30 to 1,300 yards from it. Its origin and purpose are doubtful. Ancient authorities afford conflicting evidence with regard to the Roman walls in Britain. Modern research seems to show that Severus built no wall or rampart, though some ancient historians assert that he did (v. Haverfield, quoted by Plummer, ad loc.; cf. infra c. 12 and note).
^ 45.
^ Bassianus Antoninus, surnamed Caracalla. Geta was murdered by Caracalla.
^ 46.
^ Diocletian succeeded in 284.
^ 47.
^ Carausius was a native of Menapia, in Belgium, appointed to command the Roman fleet stationed at Boulogne to guard the coasts. He took the fleet with him when he usurped imperial authority in Britain. Maximian, failing to reduce him, recognized his authority and gave him the title of Augustus. He governed vigorously and prosperously.
^ 48.
^ Allectus was a follower of Carausius. His revolt was apparently supported by the independent tribes, probably Caledonians.
^ 49.
^ Asclepiodotus was serving under Constantius Chlorus (one of the reigning Caesars), who sailed to Britain and marched against Allectus.
^ 50.
^ The statement that the Diocletian persecution extended to Britain rests on no trustworthy evidence at all. Yet though the time assigned is probably wrong, there seems to be no reason to doubt the existence of the British Protomartyr. The story rests upon a local tradition traceable up to the visit of Germanus in 429 a.d., v. infra c. 18.
^ 51.
^ Venantius Fortunatus, a Christian poet, Bishop of Poitiers, b. 530 a.d. He was the last Latin poet of any note in Gaul.
^ 52.
^ In the lives of St. Alban (all later than Bede) this clerk is called St. Amphibalus, a name probably invented from his cloak (amphibalus).
^ 53.
^ The text of this passage is probably corrupt, but all the MSS. agree. I believe the above gives the intended meaning.
^ 54.
^ There is again probably some confusion in the text.
^ 55.
^ Now St. Albans in Hertfordshire, on the Watling Street, hence probably the name, Vaeclingacaestir.
^ 56.
^ The place was afterwards called Holmhurst. The church mentioned by Bede was superseded by the monastery of St. Alban, the foundation of which is attributed to Offa, circ. 793 a.d. Certain extraordinary privileges were granted to it, and its abbot obtained a superiority over all other English abbots (Dugdale, “Monasticon”).
^ 57.
^ The evidence for their martyrdom is very doubtful.
^ 58.
^ Caerleon-on-Usk, the headquarters of the Second legion, is here meant (v. Merivale, H.R., vi, 248), though the name was also applied to Chester, seat of the Twentieth legion (cf. II, 2, p. 87, “civitas legionum”).
^ 59.
^ Constantine the Great. For the legality of the marriage, v. Dict. of Christian Biography, article “Helena.”
^ 60.
^ The First General Council, 325 a.d. It asserted the doctrine of the ὁμοούσιον against Arius. For a short account of the heresy, v. Gore, Bampton Lectures, pp. 89-92. All the evidence goes to show that this heresy affected Britain much less than Bede, on the authority of Gildas, here implies.
^ 61.
^ Valens died 378.
^ 62.
^ Another of the insular usurpers (cf. c. 6). He had served under the elder Theodosius in Britain. He revolted from Rome, successfully repressed incursions of Picts and Scots, then crossed to Gaul, where he maintained himself for four years, but was killed by the Emperor, the younger Theodosius, at Aquileia, in 388.
^ 63.
^ The real date is 395.
^ 64.
^ Pelagius, the founder of the heresy known as Pelagianism, was probably born in 370 a.d., and is said to have been a Briton, but the tradition that his real name was Morgan (Marigena, Graecised Πελάγιος), and that he was a native of Bangor, rests on very doubtful authority. His great opponent, St. Augustine, speaks of him as a good and holy man; later slanders are to be attributed to Jerome's abusive language. The cardinal point in his doctrine is his denial of original sin, involving a too great reliance on the human will in achieving holiness, and a limitation of the action of the grace of God.
^ 65.
^ Julianus of Campania is regarded as the founder of semi-Pelagianism, i.e., an intermediate position between the orthodox view and the heresy of Pelagius. He was Bishop of Eclanum, near Beneventum, and was along with seventeen other Italian bishops deposed in 418 a.d. for refusing to sign the circular letter of Pope Zosimus condemning the heresy.
^ 66.
^ A native of Aquitaine, born probably about 403 a.d., a strong opponent of the Pelagians. It is uncertain whether he was in Holy Orders or not. He wrote in prose and verse; his longest poem is called “De Ingratis” (i.e., opponents of the grace of God). His best known work is a Chronicle, not to be confused with the shorter chronicle of Prosper Tiro.
^ 67.
^ Bede includes elegiacs under this term, cf. V, 8.
^ 68.
^ The date of Honorius is correct, but the invasion of Alaric is put a year too late, if Bede refers to the first siege of Rome, in 408.
^ 69.
^ The British army, alarmed by the inroads of barbarians, and actuated by a spirit of revolt against Roman authority, set up three local emperors in rapid succession: Marcus, Gratian, and Constantine. The first two they summarily deposed and killed, but Constantine by a great victory made himself master of Gaul and Britain and extorted from the Emperor Honorius a share in the Imperial authority. Meanwhile, the Britons expelled the few remaining Roman officials, and Honorius avenged himself on Constantine for the loss of Britain in the manner described in the text.
^ 70.
^ A Roman general, afterwards associated with Honorius in the empire for a few months.
^ 71.
^ Gerontius (Welsh Geraint, akin to Irish Gerat or Gerait, a champion), was a Briton, one of Constantine's generals. Turning against his master, he invited the Germans to invade Gaul and Britain, probably intending to secure Britain for himself. But his own men conspired against him and he died by his own hand.
^ 72.
^ Rome was taken 1163 a.u.c.; 410 a.d.
^ 73.
^ Possibly “light-houses.”
^ 74.
^ Probably Inchkeith in the Forth. The Irish called the Firth of Forth the “Sea of Giudan” (v. Reeves' “Culdees,” p. 124). But Professor Rhŷs is inclined to think that Bede has confused the island Giudi with Urbs Giudi, which may perhaps be identified with the Urbs Iudeu of Nennius, probably either Carriden or Edinburgh (Rhŷs, “Celtic Britain”).
^ 75.
^ Alcluith is the Welsh name (Ail = a rock). The Goidels called it Dúnbrettan = the fortress of the Britons. Hence its modern name, Dumbarton. The river is, of course, the Clyde.
^ 76.
^ This is the earthen rampart, about thirty-five miles in length, between the Clyde and the Forth, now attributed to Antoninus Pius. Little is known about it, and it is probable that it was soon abandoned.
^ 77.
^ Abercorn, a village on the south bank of the Firth of Forth.
^ 78.
^ The name is probably Celtic (Goidelic), though, if the view which regards the Picts as a non-Celtic people be correct, it may show traces of Pictish influence. It seems to be connected with the Latin term “penna valli” = wing of (i.e., pinnacle or turret at end of) the vallum. Readers of Scott's “Antiquary” will remember the celebrated dispute with regard to this word. The Anglian Penneltun is derived from the Goidelic name.
^ 79.
^ This probably refers to the wall now attributed to Hadrian (v.s. c. 5 note). It ran for a distance of about eighty-five miles from Bowness-on-Solway to Wallsend-on-Tyne. Bede's authorities are Orosius and Gildas. The accounts he gives here and in c. 5 are an attempt to explain the difficulties and conflicting evidence with regard to these walls.
^ 80.
^ In 431 a.d. There is much confusion with regard to the mission of Palladius. According to later accounts, he was an unsuccessful forerunner of St. Patrick, but Bede here, following Prosper of Aquitaine, represents the Irish (Scotti) as in part already Christian. The origin of Irish Christianity is very obscure, and some have even doubted the existence of St. Patrick. Bede only mentions him once, viz., in the “Martyrology,” which has been largely interpolated, and is, perhaps, not his genuine work. St. Patrick's latest biographer, Professor Bury, has, however, clearly established a certain amount of fact underlying much legendary matter. Some later authorities represent Palladius as preaching to the Scots (in the modern sense) and Patrick to the Irish.
^ 81.
^ The great Roman general who preserved the Western Empire against the invasions of the barbarians for many years. He was assassinated by Valentinian in 454 a.d.
^ 82.
^ Really two years before, 444 a.d.
^ 83.
^ Though he is the subject of many legends, Vortigern is doubtless a historical figure, a ruler of south-eastern Britain. Bede's form of the name, Uurtigernus, is right. It is a British word, meaning “supreme lord” (Rhŷs).
^ 84.
^ The date of Marcian's succession is 450.
^ 85.
^ Bede only professes to give the date of the invasion approximately: cf. V, 24 (“quorum tempore”), I, 23; II, 14; V, 23 (“circiter”), calculating in round numbers apparently. He refers here to their first settlement, which, of course, does not preclude earlier attacks.
^ 86.
^ I.e., Vortigern.
^ 87.
^ Anglia was believed to be derived from Angulus. The country is the modern Schleswig, which the Angles appear to have almost entirely evacuated. For the Continental Saxons, cf. V, 9. It has been supposed that the Jutes came from Jutland, where, at a later period, they mingled with the Danes (ibid.), but this is now regarded as doubtful.
^ 88.
^ At Aylesford, in Kent. Horsted is the traditional burial-place of Horsa.
^ 89.
^ I.e., in Thanet.
^ 90.
^ The most probable view is that he was the last of those Romans who usurped imperial authority in Britain (v.s. cc. 6, 9).
^ 91.
^ The identification of this place with Badbury, in Dorsetshire (Guest, followed by Freeman and Green) seems to be disproved (W. H. Stevenson, in the “English Historical Review,” xvii, pp. 633, 634). The locality is quite uncertain; Skene actually places it near Linlithgow. According to Bede's reckoning the date of the battle would be 493 approximately. The “Annales Cambriae” give 516. For a full discussion of the question, v. Plummer, ad loc. Cf. also Mr. Stevenson's article.
^ 92.
^ Nothing more is known of them. Pelagius left Britain in early life and did not himself spread his heresy there.
^ 93.
^ The life of Germanus was written by Constantius, a priest of Lyons, who is Bede's authority for cc. 17-21. According to him, these bishops were sent to Britain by a Gallican Synod. Prosper of Aquitaine attributes the origin of the mission to Pope Celestine, “acting on the advice of the deacon Palladius” (probably the missionary to the Irish mentioned c. 13). The two statements are not irreconcilable (cf. Bright, p. 18). There are churches dedicated to SS. Germanus and Lupus in Wales and Cornwall. Both had been trained in the school of Lérins, a monastery in the group of islands off the coast at Cannes.
