Council of Aquileia — A.d. 381 (part 2 of 3)
Palladius said; ‘Why do you shrink from the name of death?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Nay, I do not shrink from it, but I confess it in respect of my flesh: for there is One by Whom I am released from the chains of death.’
Palladius said; ‘Death is caused by separation of the spirit (from the flesh), for Christ the Son of God took upon Him flesh, and by means of flesh he died.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘It is written that Christ suffered: He suffered then in respect of His flesh: in respect of His Godhead He has immortality. He who denies this, is a devil.’
Palladius said; ‘I know not Arius.’
26. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Then Arius said ill, since the Son of God also has immortality in respect of his Godhead.’ And he added, ‘Did he then say well or ill?’
Palladius said; ‘I do not agree.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘With whom do not you agree? Anathema to him, who does not frankly unfold his faith.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema.’
Palladius said; ‘Say what you please; His Godhead is immortal.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Whose? the Father’s or the Son’s?’ And he added: ‘Arius heaped together many impieties. But let us pass to other points.’
27. Then was recited; “Alone wise.”
Palladius said; ‘The Father is wise of himself, but the Son is not wise.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Is then the Son not wise, when He Himself is Wisdom? For we also say that the Son is begotten of the Father.’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘Is there anything as impious and profane as this which he said, that the Son of God is not wise?’
Palladius said; ‘He is called Wisdom, who can deny that he is Wisdom?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Is He wise or not?’
Palladius said; ‘He is Wisdom.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Then He is wise, if He is Wisdom.’
Palladius said; ‘We answer you according to the Scriptures.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Palladius, as far as I can see, has attempted to deny also that the Son of God is wise.’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘He who denies that the Son of God is wise, let him be anathema.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema.’
28. EUSEBIUS, Bishop, said; ‘Let Secundianus also answer to this.’
Secundianus being silent,
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘He who is silent wishes to reserve his judgement.’ And he added, ‘When he says that the Father alone is good, did he confess the Son or deny Him?’
Palladius said; ‘We read, S. John x. 11. I am the good Shepherd, and do we deny it? Who would not say that the Son of God is good?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Then is Christ good?’
Palladius said; ‘He is good.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Arius then was wrong in asserting it of the Father alone, since the Son of God also is a good28 God.’
Palladius said; ‘He who says that Christ is not good, says ill.’
29. EUSEBIUS, Bishop, said; ‘Do you confess that Christ is a good God? For I also am good. He has said to me; S. Luke xix. 17. Well done, thou good servant; and, Ib. vi. 45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good.’
Palladius said; ‘I have already said, I do not answer you until there is a full Council.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘The Jews said S. John vii. 12. He is a good man; and Arius denies that the Son of God is good.’
Palladius said; ‘Who can deny it?’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘Then the Son of God is a good God.’
Palladius said; ‘The good Father begat a good Son.’
30. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘We also are begotten of Him and are good, but not in respect of Godhead. Do you call the Son of God a good God?’
Palladius said; ‘The Son of God is good.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘You see then that you call him a good Christ, a good Son, not a good God; which is what is asked of you.’ And he added; ‘He who does not confess that the Son of God is a good God, Anathema to him.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema.’
31. The reader likewise continued; “Alone mighty.”
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Is the Son of God mighty or not?’
Palladius said; ‘He Who made all things, is He not mighty? He Who made all things, is He deficient in might?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said: ‘Then Arius said ill.’ And he added; ‘Do you even in this condemn Arius?’
Palladius said; ‘How do I know who he is? I answer you for myself.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Is the Son of God the mighty God?’
Palladius said; ‘He is mighty.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Is the Son of God the mighty God?’
Palladius said; ‘I have already said that the only-begotten Son of God is mighty.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘The mighty Lord.’
Palladius said; ‘The mighty Son of God.’
32. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Men also are mighty; for it is written, Ps. lii. 1. Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, thou mighty man? and in another place, 2 Cor. xii. 10. When I am weak, then am I strong. I ask you to confess that Christ the Son of God is the mighty Lord; or if you deny it, support your denial. For I speak of one Power of the Father and of the Son, and I call the Son of God mighty in the same way as the Father. Do you hesitate then to confess that the Son of God is the mighty Lord?’
Palladius said; ‘I have already said, we answer you in discussion as we can; for you wish to be sole judges, and at the same time parties to the case. We do not answer you now, but we will answer you in a General and full Council.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Anathema to him who denies that Christ is the mighty Lord.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema.’
33. It was likewise recited; “Alone mighty, Judge of all.”
Palladius said; ‘The Son of God, the Judge of all. There is Who gives, there is who receives.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Did He give by grace or nature? Men also have judgement given them.’
Palladius said; ‘Do you call the Father greater or not?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘I will answer you afterwards.’
Palladius said; ‘I do not answer you, if you do not answer me.’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘Unless you condemn in order the impiety of Arius, we will give you no power of asking questions.’
Palladius said; ‘I do not answer you.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Is the Son of God, as has been read, Judge or not?’
Palladius said; ‘If you do not answer me, I do not answer you, as being an impious person.’
34. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘You have my profession, whereby I will answer you. In the mean time, let Arius’ letter be read through.’ And he added: ‘In that letter you will find that sacrilegious argument also which you are endeavouring at.’
Palladius said; ‘When I ask, do you not answer?’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘We call the Son of God equal God.’
Palladius said: ‘You are Judge: your note-takers are here.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Let any of yours write, who please.’
35. PALLADIUS said; ‘Is the Father greater or not?’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘In respect of His Godhead the Son is equal to the Father. You have it in the Gospel that the Jews persecuted Him S. John v. 18. because He not only broke the sabbath, but also called God His Father, making Himself equal with God; what then impious men confessed while they persecuted, we who believe cannot deny.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘And in another place you have: Phil. ii. 6–8. Who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied himself29 and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and became obedient unto death. You see that in the form of God He is equal to God. And he took, S. Paul says, the form of a servant. In what then is He less? In respect surely of His form of a servant, not of the form of God?’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘Just as, being established in the form of a servant, He was not less than a servant; so being established in the form of God, He could not be less than God.’
36. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Or say that in respect of Godhead the Son of God is less.’
Palladius said; ‘The Father is greater.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘In respect of the flesh.’
Palladius said; S. John xiv. 28. ‘He who sent me, is greater than I. Was the flesh sent by God or was the Son of God sent?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘We prove this day that the holy Scriptures are falsely cited by you, for thus it is written: Ib. 27, 28. Peace I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid: If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father, for my Father is greater than I. He did not say, He Who sent me is greater than I.’
Palladius said; ‘The Father is greater.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Anathema to him, who adds to or takes from the holy Scriptures.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema.’
37. PALLADIUS said; ‘The Father is greater than the Son.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘In respect of the flesh the Son is less than the Father: in respect of Godhead He is equal to the Father: I read therefore that the Son of God is equal to the Father, as also the instances that have been adduced testify. But why should you wonder that He is less in respect of the flesh, when He has called Himself a servant, a stone, a worm, when He has said that He is less than the angels, for it is written: Heb. ii. 7. Thou madest him a little lower than the angels.’
Palladius said; ‘I see that you make impious assertions. We do not answer you without arbiters.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘Let no one ask for an opinion from him who has blasphemed in such countless opinions.’
Palladius said; ‘We do not answer you.’
38. SABINUS, Bishop, said; ‘Palladius has now been condemned by all. The blasphemies of Arius are much lighter than those of Palladius.’
And when Palladius rose, as if he wished to go out, he said; ‘Palladius has risen, because he sees that he is to be convicted by manifest testimonies of the Scriptures, as indeed he has been already convicted: for thus it has been read, that in respect of Godhead the Son is equal to the Father. Let him admit that in respect of His Godhead the Son of God has no greater: it is written: Ib. vi. 13. When God made promise to Abraham, because He could swear by no greater, he swear by himself. You see therefore the Scripture, that He could swear by no greater. But it is the Son of Whom this is said, since it was He Who appeared to Abraham, whence also He says, S. John viii. 56. He saw my day and was glad.’
Palladius said; ‘The Father is greater.’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘When He spake as God, He had no greater; when He spake as man, He had one greater.’
39. PALLADIUS said; ‘The Father begat the Son; the Father sent the Son.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Anathema to him, who denies that in respect of His Godhead the Son is equal to the Father.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema.’
Palladius said; ‘The Son is subject to the Father; the Son keeps the commands of the Father.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘He is subject in respect of His Incarnation. But even you yourself remember that you have read; S. John vi. 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father draw him.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘Let him say whether the Son is subject to the Father in respect of His Godhead, or in respect of His Incarnation.’
40. PALLADIUS said; ‘Then the Father is greater.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘In another place also it is written; 1 Cor. i. 8. God is faithful, by Whom ye were called unto the fellowship of His Son. I say that the Father is greater in respect of the assumption of the flesh, which the Son of God took upon Him, not in respect of the Son’s Godhead.’
Palladius said; ‘What then is the comparison of the Son of God? And can flesh say, God is greater than I? Did the flesh speak or the Godhead because the flesh was there?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘The flesh does not speak without the soul.’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘God in the flesh spoke according to the flesh, when He said, S. John viii. 40. Why do ye persecute30 me, a man? Who said this?’
Palladius said; ‘The Son of God.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Then the Son of God is God in respect of His Godhead and is man in respect of His flesh.’
Palladius said; ‘He took flesh upon Him.’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘Accordingly He made use of human words.’
Palladius said; ‘He took man’s flesh upon Him.’
41. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Let him say that the Apostle did not call Him subject in respect of His Godhead, but in respect of His flesh; for it is written, He humbled himself and became obedient unto death. In what then did He taste death?’
Palladius said; ‘In that He humbled Himself.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Not His Godhead but His flesh was humbled and subject.’ And he added; ‘Did Arius well or ill in calling him a perfect creature?’
Palladius said; ‘I do not answer you, for you have no authority.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Profess what you please.’
Palladius said; ‘I do not answer you.’
42. SABINUS, Bishop, said; ‘Do you not answer on behalf of Arius? do you not answer to what has been asked?’
Palladius said; ‘I have not answered on behalf of Arius.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘You have answered so far as to deny that the Son of God is mighty, to deny that He is true God.’
Palladius said; ‘I do not allow you to be my judge, whom I convict of impiety.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘You yourself forced us to sit.’
Palladius said; ‘I gave in a request that you might sit, in order that I might convict you. Why have you practised upon the Emperor? You have gained by intrigue that the Council should not be a plenary one.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘When Arius’ impieties were read, your impiety also, which harmonized with his, was condemned equally. You have thought fit while the letter was in the midst of being read, to bring forward whatever passages you would: you were told in answer in what way the Son has said that the Father is greater, because in respect of His taking flesh upon Him, the Father is greater than He. You have urged also that the Son of God is subject; and on this head you were answered that the Son of God is subject in respect of His flesh, not in respect of His divinity. You have our profession. Now hear the rest. Since you have been answered, do you answer to what is read.’
43. PALLADIUS said; ‘I do not answer you, because what I have said has not been recorded; only your words are recorded. I do not answer you.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘You see that every thing is recorded. Moreover, what has been written is abundant for the proof of your impiety.’ And he added; ‘Do you say that Christ is a creature or do you deny it?’
Palladius said; ‘I do not answer you.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘An hour ago, when it was read that Arius called Christ a creature, you denied it: you had an opportunity offered you of condemning his perfidy; you would not. Say now at last whether Christ was begotten of the Father or created.’
Palladius said; ‘If you please, let my reporters come and so let the whole be taken down.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘Let him send for his reporters.’
Palladius said; ‘We will answer you in a full Council.’
44. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Attalus subscribed the formula31 of the Council of Nicæa. Let him deny it, as he has come to our Council. Let him say to-day, whether he subscribed the formula of the Council of Nicæa or no?’
Attalus remaining silent,
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Though the presbyter Attalus is an Arian, yet we give him permission to speak: let him frankly state whether he subscribed the formula of the Council of Nicæa under his Bishop Agrippinus, or no.’
Attalus said; ‘You have already said that I have been several times condemned. I do not answer you.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Did you subscribe the formula of the Council of Nicæa or no?’
Attalus said; ‘I do not answer you.’
45. PALLADIUS said; ‘Do you now wish the formula to be regarded as general or no?’
Chromatius, presbyter, said; ‘You have not denied that He is a creature, you have denied that He is mighty. You have denied every thing which the Catholic Faith professes.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘We are witnesses that Attalus subscribed the Council of Nicæa, and that he now refuses to answer. What is the opinion of all?’
As Attalus did not speak,
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Let him say whether he subscribed the formula of the Council of Nicæa or no.’
46. PALLADIUS said; ‘Let your reporter and ours stand forward and write down every thing.’
Valerian, Bishop, said; ‘What you have said and what you have denied is already all written.’
Palladius said; ‘Say what you please.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Since Palladius who has been already many times condemned, wishes to be condemned still oftener, I am reading the letter of Arius which he has not chosen to condemn: do you state whether you approve of my doing so.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Let it be read.’
Then the words were read. “But begotten not putatively,” &c.
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘I have answered you on the Father’s being greater: I have answered you also on the Son’s being subject: do you yourself answer now.’
47. PALLADIUS said; ‘I will not answer unless arbiters come after the Lord’s day.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘You were come with a view to discussion, but since I have charged you with its doctrines, you have seen the letter of Arius which you have not chosen to condemn and which you cannot support: you now therefore shrink back and cavil. I read it to you fully point by point. Tell me whether you believe Christ to have been created; whether there was a time when he was not; or whether the only begotten Son of God has always existed. When you have heard Arius’ letter, either condemn it or approve of it.’
48. PALLADIUS said; ‘Since I convict you of impiety, I will not have you for judge. You are a transgressor.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘Say, what impieties you object to our brother and fellow-bishop Ambrose.’
Palladius said; ‘I have already told you, I will answer in a full Council, and with arbiters present.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘I desire to be confuted and convicted in the assembly of my brethren. Say then what I have said impiously; but I appear impious to you because I support piety.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘Does then he seem impious to you, who censures the blasphemies of Arius?’
49. PALLADIUS said; ‘I have not denied that the Son of God is good.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Do you say that Christ is a good God?’
Palladius said; ‘I do not answer you.’
Valerian, Bishop, said; ‘Do not press Palladius so much: he cannot confess our truths with simplicity. For his conscience is confused with a twofold blasphemy: he was ordained by the Photinians and was condemned with them, and now he shall be condemned more fully.’
Palladius said; ‘Prove it.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘He would not have denied that Christ is true if he were not following his own teachers.’
50. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘You have objected to me that I am impious: prove it.’
Palladius said; ‘We will bring forward our statement, and when we have brought it, then the discussion shall be held.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Condemn the impiety of Arius.’
Palladius being silent,
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘He dwells upon useless subjects. There are so many impieties of Arius, which Palladius has not chosen to condemn, nay rather has confessed by supporting. He who does not condemn Arius is like him, and is rightly to be called a heretic.’
All the Bishops said; ‘On the part of us all let Palladius be anathema.’
51. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Do you consent, Palladius, that the other statements of Arius be read?’
Palladius said; ‘Give us arbiters: let reporters come on both sides. You cannot be judges unless we have arbitrators and unless persons come on both sides to arbitrate, we do not answer you.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘What arbitrators do you wish for?’
Palladius said; ‘There are here many men of high rank.’
Sabinus, Bishop, said; ‘After such a number of blasphemies do you wish for arbitrators?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Bishops ought to judge of laymen: not laymen of Bishops. But tell me what judges you wish for.’
Palladius said; ‘Let arbitrators attend.’
Chromatius, the Presbyter, said; ‘Without prejudice to condemnation by the Bishops, let those also who are of Palladius’ party be heard at full length.’
52. PALLADIUS said; ‘They are not allowed to speak. Let arbitrators attend and reporters on both sides, and then they will answer you in a General Council.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Though he has been convicted of many impieties, yet we should blush that a person who claims the priesthood for himself should seem to have been condemned by laymen, and on this very ground and in this very point he deserves condemnation because he looks to the sentence of laymen, when priests ought rather to be the judges of laymen. Looking to what we have this day heard Palladius professing and to what he has refused to condemn, I pronounce him unworthy of the priesthood, and I judge that he should be deprived32 thereof in order that a Catholic may be ordained in his place.’
All the Bishops said; ‘Anathema to Palladius.’
53. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘The most gracious and Christian Emperor has committed the cause to the judgement of the Bishops and has constituted them arbitrators of the dispute33. Since therefore the decision appears to have been made over to us, so that we are the interpreters of the Scriptures, let us condemn Palladius, who has not chosen to condemn the sentiments of the impious Arius, and because he has himself denied the Son of God to be everlasting, and made the other statements which appear in our proceedings. Let him therefore be accounted Anathema.’
