Council of Aquileia — A.d. 381 (part 3 of 3)
All the Bishops said; ‘We all condemn him; let him be accounted anathema.’
54. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Since all who are met here are Christian men, brethren approved of God, and our fellow-bishops, let each individual say, what he thinks.’
Valerian, Bishop, said; ‘My sentence is that he who defends Arius is an Arian; that he who does not condemn his blasphemies is himself a blasphemer; and therefore I judge that such a man is alien from the fellowship of Bishops.’
Palladius said; ‘You have begun to play; play on. Without an Eastern Council we answer you not.’
55. ANEMIUS, Bishop of Sirmium, said; ‘Whoever does not condemn the heresies of Arius must of necessity be an Arian. Him therefore I judge to be alien from our communion, and to be without place in the assembly of Bishops.’
Constantius, Bishop of Orange, said; ‘As Palladius is a disciple of Arius, whose impieties have been long since condemned by our Fathers in the Council of Nice, but have this day severally, when recited, been approved of by Palladius, inasmuch as he was not disturbed at his acknowledging that the Son of God was not of the same Nature with God the Father, and at his calling Him a creature, and saying that He began to be in time, and denying Him to be true Lord, on these grounds, I judge that he should be condemned for ever.’
56. JUSTUS, Bishop, said; ‘Palladius who has refused to condemn the blasphemies of Arius, and who seems rather to acknowledge them, can in my judgement no longer be called a Priest or be reckoned among Bishops.’
Eventius, Bishop of Ticinum, said; ‘I think that Palladius who has refused to condemn the impieties of Arius, is removed for ever from the fellowship of Bishops.’
57. ABUNDANTIUS, Bishop of Trent, said; ‘Since Palladius maintains evident blasphemies, let him know that he is condemned by the Council of Aquileia.’
Eusebius, Bishop of Bologna, said; ‘Inasmuch as Palladius has not only refused to condemn the impieties of Arius, impieties written with the pen of the devil, and which it is not lawful so much as to listen to, but has also appeared as the maintainer of them by denying that the Son of God is true Lord, is good Lord, is wise Lord, is everlasting Lord; both by my sentence, and by the judgement of all Catholics I think that he is rightly condemned and excluded from the assembly of Bishops.’
58. SABINUS, Bishop of Placentia, said; ‘Since it has been proved to all that Palladius supports the Arian perfidy and maintains its impiety that was counter to the Evangelical and apostolical institutions, a just sentence of the whole Council has been passed upon him, and humble individual as I am, let him by my judgement be deprived once more of the priesthood and banished justly from this most holy assembly.’
Felix and Numidius, deputies of Africa said; ‘Anathema to the Sect of the Arian heresy to which by the Synod of Aquileia Palladius is pronounced to belong. But we condemn also those, who contradict the truth of the Nicene Synod.’
59. LIMENIUS, Bishop of Vercellæ, said; ‘It is manifest that the Arian doctrine has been often condemned: and therefore, inasmuch as Palladius having been appealed to in this holy Synod of Aquileia has refused to correct and amend himself, and has rather proved himself worthy of blame and defiled himself with the perfidy which he has publicly professed himself to hold, I too by my judgement declare that he is to be deprived of the fellowship of the Bishops.’
Maximus, Bishop of Emona, said; ‘That Palladius, who would not condemn, but has rather himself acknowledged, the blasphemies of Arius, is justly and deservedly condemned God knows, and the conscience of the faithful has condemned him.’
60. EXUPERANTIUS, Bishop of Dertona, said; ‘As the rest of my Colleagues have condemned Palladius who has refused to condemn the sect and doctrine of Arius, and on the contrary has defended them, I also likewise condemn him.’
Bassianus, Bishop of Lodi, said; ‘I have heard along with the rest of my Colleagues the impieties of Arius, which Palladius not only has not condemned but has confirmed. Let him be anathema and be deprived of the priesthood.’
61. PHILASTER, Bishop of Brescia, said; ‘The blasphemies and iniquity of Palladius, who follows and defends the Arian doctrine I in company with all have condemned.’
Constantius, Bishop of Sciscia, said; ‘As the rest of my brother Bishops, I also think that Palladius is to be condemned, who has refused to condemn the blasphemies and impieties of Arius.’
Heliodorus, Bishop of Altinum, said; ‘The man who maintains the perfidy of Arius, and of all the heretics with whom Palladius is partner, whose heart is foolish, and who has not confessed the truth, together with the rest of my brother Bishops I condemn.’
62. FELIX, Bishop of Jadera, said; ‘I also in like manner unite with all in condemning Palladius, who speaks blasphemies against the Son of God as Arius did.’
Theodorus, Bishop of Octodorum, said; ‘We judge Palladius, who has denied Christ to be true God, co-eternal with the Father, to be in no wise either a Christian or a priest.’
Domninus, Bishop of Grenoble, said; ‘As Palladius adheres to the perfidy of Arius, I also judge that he is to be condemned for ever, as my brethren also have condemned him.’
63. PROCULUS, Bishop of Marseilles, said; ‘Palladius, who by a kind of impious succession to the blasphemies of Arius has defended them in that he does not condemn them, as he has been already designated a blasphemer by the sentence of many venerable Bishops, and pronounced alien from the priesthood, so by my sentence also is marked out in the same manner as condemned for ever.’
Diogenes, Bishop of Genoa, said; ‘Palladius who while he does not confess has even denied Christ to be true Lord and God, like and equal to the Father, I together with the rest of my brethren and fellow Bishops adjudge to have the lot of condemnation.’
64. AMANTIUS, Bishop of Nice, said; ‘Palladius, who has refused to pull down the sect of Arius, according to the judgement of my brother Bishops, I also condemn.’
Januarius, Bishop, said; ‘As all my brother Bishops have condemned Palladius so also do I think that he ought to be condemned by a similar judgement34.’
65. SECUNDIANUS having withdrawn for a while, and then returned to the Council35,
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘You have heard, Secundianus, what sort of sentence the impious Palladius has received, having been condemned by the Council of Bishops: and though we have been displeased that you have not shrunk from his madness, I nevertheless make some special enquiries of you. Do you say that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is or is not very God?’
Secundianus said; ‘He who denies the Father of our Lord and God Jesus Christ to be true God is not a Christian, nor is he who denies that the Lord is the very Son of God.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘Do you confess that the Son of God is very God?’
Secundianus said; ‘I say that He is the very Son of God, the very only begotten Son of God.’
66. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Do you call Him very Lord?’
Secundianus said; ‘I call Him the very only-begotten Son of God. Who denies that He is the very Son of God?’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘It is not enough that you confess Him to be the only-begotten Son of God, for all confess this. But what influences us is that Arius said that the Father alone is Lord, alone is true, and denied that the Son of God is very Lord. Do you confess simply that the Son of God is very God?’
Secundianus said; ‘Who Arius was, I know not; what he said, I know not. You speak with me, living man with living man. I say what Christ said: S. John i. 18. The only begotten Son Which is in the bosom of the Father. Therefore He asserts Himself to be the only-begotten Son of the Father: the only-begotten Son is then the very Son of God.’
67. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; “Is the very Son of God also very God? It is written in the divine books: Isa. lxv. 16. he that sweareth on the earth, shall swear by the true God, and that this applies to Christ there is no doubt. We therefore profess the true God, and this is our faith and profession, that the only-begotten Son of the Father is very God. Do you then say ‘of very God,’ and then that the Son is very God.”
Secundianus said; ‘Of very God.’
68. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Is the Son of God very God?’
Secundianus said; ‘Then would he be a liar.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘In this you practise an evasion to avoid saying very God, but instead thereof, God, very only-begotten, and therefore say simply, The only-begotten Son of God is very God.’
Secundianus said; ‘I called Him the only-begotten Son of God.’
69. EUSEBIUS, Bishop, said; ‘This Photinus does not deny, this Sabellus confesses.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘And he who does not confess this is justly condemned, and on this point I appeal to you many times though by cavilling you have denied the truth. I do not ask you to call Him merely the very only-begotten Son of God, but to call Him also very God.’
Secundianus said; ‘I profess myself the servant of truth. What I say is not taken down and what you say is taken down. I say that Christ is the true Son of God. Who denies that He is the true Son of God?’
70. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘He who denies that the only-begotten Son of God is very God, let him be anathema.’
Secundianus said; ‘The only-begotten Son of God, very God! why do you state to me what is not written?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said: ‘It is plain sacrilege, that Arius denied Christ the Son of God to be very God.’
Secundianus said; ‘Forasmuch as Christ is called the Son of God, I call the Son of God very Son36; but that He is very God is not written.’
71. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Have you not yet recovered your senses?’ And he added; ‘Lest it should appear that he has been unfairly treated, let him state his opinion. Let him then say that Christ the only-begotten Son of God is very God.’
Secundianus said; ‘I have already said. What more would you wring from me?’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘What have you said? certainly if you had said so great truths, what is said gloriously, may well be often repeated.’
Secundianus said; ‘It is written, S. Matt. v. 37. Let your conversation be yea, yea, nay, nay.’
72. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘He who says that the Father Himself is the Son, is sacrilegious. This I ask of you that you would say that the Son of God is begotten very God of very God.’
Secundianus said; ‘I say that the Son is begotten of God, as He says Himself Heb. i. 5. I have begotten Thee, and that He confesses Himself to be begotten.’
73. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘Is He very God of very God?’
Secundianus said; ‘When you add to the Name and call Him very [God], do you understand what the character of your own faith is, and are you a Christian?’
Eusebius, Bishop, said; ‘Who has denied that He is very God? Arius and Palladius have denied it. If you believe Him to be very God, you should simply express it.’
74. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; ‘If you will not say that He is very God begotten of very God, you have denied Christ.’
Secundianus said; ‘When asked about the Son, I answered you: I have answered as to the manner in which I ought to make my profession. We have your statement: we will bring it forward; let it be read.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘You should have brought it forward to-day, but you are attempting a subterfuge. You demand a profession of me and I demand a profession of you. Is the Son of God very God?’
Secundianus said; ‘The Son of God is God only-begotten. I also ask him: Is He only-begotten?’
75. AMBROSE, Bishop, said; “Let reason move us: let us be moved too by your impiety and folly. When you speak of God very only-begotten, you do not apply the ‘very’ to ‘God,’ but to ‘only-begotten.’ And therefore to remove this question answer me this: Is He very God of very God?”
Secundianus said; ‘Did then God not beget God? He Who is very God begat What He is; He begat one true only-begotten Son.’
Ambrose, Bishop, said; ‘You do not confess Him very God but you would call Him very only-begotten. I too call Him only-begotten, but also very God.’
Secundianus said; ‘I say that he was begotten of the Father, I say to all that he was very begotten37.’
The Names of the Bishops and Presbyters who were present at the Council.
VALERIAN, Bishop of Aquileia38.
AMBROSE, Bishop of Milan.
EUSEBIUS, Bishop of Bologna.
LIMENIUS, Bishop of Vercellæ.
ANEMIUS, Bishop of Sirmium in Illyricum.
SABINUS, Bishop of Placentia.
ABUNDANTIUS, Bishop of Brescia.
CONSTANTIUS, Bishop of Orange, Deputy of the Gauls.
THEODORUS, Bishop of Octodurus.
DOMNINUS, Bishop of Grenoble.
AMANTIUS, Bishop of Nice.
MAXIMUS, Bishop of Emona.
BASSIANUS, Bishop of Lodi.
PROCULUS, Bishop of Marseilles, Deputy of the Gauls.
HELIODORUS, Bishop of Altinum.
FELIX, Bishop of Jadera.
EVENTIUS, Bishop of Ticinum39.
EXSUPERANTIUS, Bishop of Dertona.
DIOGENES, Bishop of Genoa.
CONSTANTIUS, Bishop of Sciscia.
JUSTUS, Bishop of Lyons, also Deputy of the Gauls.
FELIX, Deputy of Africa.
NUMIDIUS, Deputy of Africa.
EVAGRIUS, Presbyter and Deputy.
ARTEMIUS, ALMACHIUS, JANUARIUS, JOVINUS, MACEDONIUS, CASSIANUS, MARCELLUS, EUSTATHIUS, MAXIMUS, CHROMATIUS a Presbyter.
