Letter XXXVIII. — A.d. 387
IN this letter S. Ambrose continues the subject, maintaining that the truly wise man is not only free but rich also, illustrating his statements with instances from the Old Testament.
AMBROSE TO SIMPLICIAN, GREETING.
1. WHEN we lately pointed out, taking our theme from the epistle of the Apostle Paul, that every wise man is free, we seemed to have fallen into philosophical discussion. But afterwards, in reading the epistle of the Apostle Peter, I perceived that every wise man is also rich: and this he says without distinction of sex, for he writes that all a woman’s ornaments consist in a virtuous life, not in costly jewels, 1 S. Pet. iii. 3, 4. Whose adorning, he says, is not that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel, but the hidden man of the heart.
2. Here then are two things, both that there is a man within the man, and that he is rich who seeks not for himself the enjoyment of any riches. And he has well said, the man of the heart, in that the whole man of wisdom is hidden, as is wisdom itself, which is not seen but understood. No one before Peter used such an expression as, the man of the heart; for the outward man consists of many members, but the inward man of the heart is entirely full of wisdom, full of grace, full of beauty.
3. 1 S. Pet. iii. 4. In that, he says, which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. And he is truly rich, who can appear rich in the sight of God, in whose sight the earth is small, the world itself is narrow, but God considers him only to be rich who is rich for eternity, who lays up the fruit not of riches, but of virtues. And who is rich before God but that meek and quiet spirit which is never corrupted? Does not he appear to you to be rich, who possesses peace of mind and the tranquillity of rest? who desires nothing, is not tossed by the storms of lust, despises not old things, seeks not new, so as by his constant desire to become poor in the midst of riches?
4. That peace is truly rich, which Phil. iv. 7. passeth all understanding. Peace is rich, modesty is rich, faith is rich, for Prov. xxviii. 10. to the faithful the whole world is a possession. Simplicity is rich, for there are also the riches of simplicity; for she scrutinizes nothing, has no mean, no suspicious, no deceitful thoughts, but pours herself forth with pure affection.
5. Goodness too is rich, and if a man preserve it he is fed by the riches of the heavenly inheritance. To quote also the more ancient examples of Scripture, Job v. 17–24. Happy, it is said, is the man whom God correcteth. Therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty ... in famine He shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword. Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue; ... the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee, and thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace. For the vices of this flesh being subdued, and those passions which are wont to war against the soul, your tabernacle shall be undisturbed, Gen. xxvii. 37. your house without offence, your seed shall not fail, your posterity shall be as the smell of a fruitful field, your burial as the harvest. Job v. 26. For while others are looking for theirs to fail, the heap of your corn will be carried ripe into the heavenly garners.
6. Ps. xxxvii. 26. Fit it is that the righteous ever lendeth, while the wicked man is in want. He lendeth justice, he lendeth the commandments of God to the poor and needy; but the fool does not possess even that which he believes himself to possess. Do you suppose that he can be said to possess, who brooding over his treasure night and day, is troubled by covetous and wretched anxiety? Such a one truly wants; although to others he appears rich, to himself he is poor, because he who is still grasping after more and desiring more uses not that which he possesses. For where there are no bounds to desire, what profit can there be in riches? No man is rich who cannot carry away with him that which he has, for that which is left behind, is not our own but another’s.
7. Gen. v. 24. Enoch was rich who carried away with him that which he had, and laid up all the riches of his goodness in the heavenly treasure-house; he was Wisd. iv. 11. taken away lest that wickedness should alter his understanding. 2 Kings ii. 11. Elias was rich, who riding in a chariot of fire carried the treasures of his virtues up to the heavenly mansions. Not small were the riches he left to his heir, and yet he himself did not lose them. Who would have called him poor even then, when being himself in need of the sustenance of daily food, 1 Kings xvii. 9. he was sent to the widow that he might be nourished by her, when at his voice the heaven was shut and opened, when at his word the barrel of meal and the cruse of oil failed not for three years, but overflowed; when it was replenished not diminished by use? 2 Kings i. 14. Who would call him poor at whose word there came fire down from heaven, Ib. ii. 8. whom the river impassible by others could not retard, retiring back to its source that the prophet might pass over dry-shod?
8. Ancient history tells us of two neighbours, king Ahab and the poor Naboth; which of these do we believe to be the richer, which the poorer? The one, endowed with the royal support of riches, insatiable and not to be replenished with wealth, coveted the little vineyard of the poor man; the other, despising in his mind the golden fortunes of kings, and imperial treasures, was content with his own vines. Does not he appear richer and more kingly, who was sufficient to himself, and controlled his own desires, coveting nothing that belonged to another? Does not he, on the other hand, appear most needy, in whose eyes his own gold was accounted vile, and another man’s vine precious. But learn for what reason he was most needy: because Job xx. 15. riches unjustly gotten are vomited up again, but Prov. xii. 12. the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit, Ps. xcii. 11. and flourishes like a palm-tree.
9. Is not he more needy than the poor man, who passeth away like a shadow? Ps. xxxvii. 35, 36. To-day the ungodly is in great power, to-morrow he is not, and his place can no more be found. But what is it to be rich, unless it be to abound? But who abounds whose mind is contracted, and therefore straightened, and what abundance can there be in straits? He therefore is not rich who does not abound. Wherefore David says well, Ps. xxxiv. 10. LXX, Vulg. The rich lack and suffer hunger; for although they possessed the treasures of the Divine Scriptures, they still lacked in that they did not understand, and hungered in that they tasted not the food of spiritual grace.
10. Nothing can therefore be richer than the temper of the wise man, nothing poorer than that of the fool. For since the S. Matt. v. 3. kingdom of God belongs to the poor, what can be richer? And therefore the Apostle says well, Rom. xi. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! Well also David, who Ps. cxix. 14. had as great delight in the way of the heavenly testimonies as in all manner of riches. And Moses says expressly, Deut. xxxiii. 23. Naphtali, satisfied with favour. Now Naphtali means when translated, ‘abundance’ or ‘increase.’ So that to be satisfied and to abound go together, but where there is the hunger of desire and insatiable lust, there truly is poverty. But since scarcely any desire of money or of this world can be satisfied, it is added, Ib. 23. full with blessing.
11. It is in accordance with these principles that the Apostle Peter has declared that 1 S. Pet. iii. 3. the ornament of women consists not in gold and silver and apparel, but in the secret and hidden man of the heart. Wherefore let no woman put off the dress of piety, the ornament of grace, the inheritance of eternal life.
Farewell: love me, for I love you.
