Book II · Part 4 of 4
Chapter XXXV.—Precepts from the Prophetic Books.
The divine law, then, not only forbids the worshipping of idols, but also of the heavenly bodies, the sun, the moon, or the other stars; yea, not heaven, nor earth, nor the sea, nor fountains, nor rivers, must be worshipped, but we must serve in holiness of heart and sincerity of purpose only the living and true God, who also is Maker of the universe. Wherefore saith the holy law: “Thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not bear false witness; thou shalt not desire thy neighbour’s wife.” So also the prophets. Solomon indeed teaches us that we must not sin with so much as a turn of the eye, saying, “Let thine eyes look right on, and let thy eyelids look straight before thee.” And Moses, who himself also was a prophet, says, concerning the sole government of God: “Your God is He who establishes the heaven, and forms the earth, whose hands have brought forth all the host of heaven; and He has not set these things before you that you should go after them.” And Isaiah himself also says: “Thus saith the Lord God who established the heavens, and founded the earth and all that is therein, and giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. This is the Lord your God.” And again, through him He says: “I have made the earth, and man upon it. I by my hand have established the heavens.” And in another chapter, “This is your God, who created the ends of the earth; He hungereth not, neither is weary, and there is no searching of His understanding.” So, too, Jeremiah says: “Who hath made the earth by His power, and established the world by His wisdom, and by His discretion hath stretched out the heavens, and a mass of water in the heavens, and He caused the clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth; He made lightnings with rain, and brought forth winds out of His treasures.” One can see how consistently and harmoniously all the prophets spoke, having given utterance through one and the same spirit concerning the unity of God, and the creation of the world, and the formation of man. Moreover, they were in sore travail, bewailing the godless race of men, and they reproached those, who seemed to be wise, for their error and hardness of heart. Jeremiah, indeed, said: “Every man is brutishly gone astray from the knowledge of Him; every founder is confounded by his graven images; in vain the silversmith makes his molten images; there is no breath in them: in the day of their visitation they shall perish.” The same, too, says David: “They are corrupt, they have done abominable works; there is none that doeth good, no, not one; they have all gone aside, they have together become profitless.” So also Habakkuk: “What profiteth the graven image that he has graven it a lying image? Woe to him that saith to the stone, Awake; and to the wood, Arise.” Likewise spoke the other prophets of the truth. And why should I recount the multitude of prophets, who are numerous, and said ten thousand things consistently and harmoniously? For those who desire it, can, by reading what they uttered, accurately understand the truth, and no longer be carried away by opinion and profitless labour. These, then, whom we have already mentioned, were prophets among the Hebrews,—illiterate, and shepherds, and uneducated.
Chapter XXXVI.—Prophecies of the Sibyl.
And the Sibyl, who was a prophetess among the Greeks and the other nations, in the beginning of her prophecy, reproaches the race of men, saying:—
“How are ye still so quickly lifted up,	And how so thoughtless of the end of life,	Ye mortal men of flesh, who are but nought?	Do ye not tremble, nor fear God most high?	Your Overseer, the Knower, Seer of all,	Who ever keeps those whom His hand first made,	Puts His sweet Spirit into all His works,	And gives Him for a guide to mortal men.	There is one only uncreated God,	Who reigns alone, all-powerful, very great,	From whom is nothing hid. He sees all things,	Himself unseen by any mortal eye.	Can mortal man see the immortal God,	Or fleshly eyes, which shun the noontide beams,	Look upon Him, who dwells beyond the heavens?	Worship Him then, the self-existent God,	The unbegotten Ruler of the world,	Who only was from everlasting time,	And shall to everlasting still abide.	Of evil counsels ye shall reap the fruit,	Because ye have not honoured the true God,	Nor offered to Him sacred hecatombs.	To those who dwell in Hades ye make gifts,	And unto demons offer sacrifice.	In madness and in pride ye have your walk;	And leaving the right way, ye wander wide,	And lose yourselves in pitfalls and in thorns.	Why do ye wander thus, O foolish men?	Cease your vain wanderings in the black, dark night;	Why follow darkness and perpetual gloom	When, see, there shines for you the blessed light?	Lo, He is clear—in Him there is no spot.	Turn, then, from darkness, and behold the day;	Be wise, and treasure wisdom in your breasts.	There is one God who sends the winds and rains,	The earthquakes, and the lightnings, and the plagues,	The famines, and the snow-storms, and the ice,	And all the woes that visit our sad race.	Nor these alone, but all things else He gives,	Ruling omnipotent in heaven and earth,	And self-existent from eternity.”
And regarding those [gods] that are said to have been born, she said:—
“If all things that are born must also die,	“God cannot be produced by mortal man.	But there is only One, the All-Supreme,	Who made the heavens, with all their starry host,	The sun and moon; likewise the fruitful earth,	With all the waves of ocean, and the hills,	The fountains, and the ever flowing streams;	He also made the countless multitude	Of ocean creatures, and He keeps alive	All creeping things, both of the earth and sea;	And all the tuneful choir of birds He made,	Which cleave the air with wings, and with shrill pipe	Trill forth at morn their tender, clear-voiced song.	Within the deep glades of the hills He placed	A savage race of beasts; and unto men	He made all cattle subject, making man	The God-formed image, ruler over all,	And putting in subjection to his sway	Things many and incomprehensible.	For who of mortals can know all these things?	He only knows who made them at the first,	He the Creator, incorruptible,	Who dwells in upper air eternally;	Who proffers to the good most rich rewards,	And against evil and unrighteous men	Rouses revenge, and wrath, and bloody wars,	And pestilence, and many a tearful grief.	O man exalted vainly—say why thus	Hast thou so utterly destroyed thyself?	Have ye no shame worshipping beasts for gods?	And to believe the gods should steal your beasts,	Or that they need your vessels—is it not	Frenzy’s most profitless and foolish thought?	Instead of dwelling in the golden heavens,	Ye see your gods become the prey of worms,	And hosts of creatures noisome and unclean.	O fools! ye worship serpents, dogs, and cats,	Birds, and the creeping things of earth and sea,	Images made with hands, statues of stone,	And heaps of rubbish by the wayside placed.	All these, and many more vain things, ye serve,	Worshipping things disgraceful even to name:	These are the gods who lead vain men astray,	From whose mouth streams of deadly poison flow.	But unto Him in whom alone is life,	Life, and undying, everlasting light;	Who pours into man’s cup of life a joy	Sweeter than sweetest honey to his taste,—	Unto Him bow the head, to Him alone,	And walk in ways of everlasting peace.	Forsaking Him, ye all have turned aside,	And, in your raving folly, drained the cup	Of justice quite unmixed, pure, mastering, strong;	And ye will not again be sober men,	Ye will not come unto a sober mind,	And know your God and King, who looks on all:	Therefore, upon you burning fire shall come,	And ever ye shall daily burn in flames,	Ashamed for ever of your useless gods.	But those who worship the eternal God,	They shall inherit everlasting life,	Inhabiting the blooming realms of bliss,	And feasting on sweet food from starry heaven.”
That these things are true, and useful, and just, and profitable to all men, is obvious. Even the poets have spoken of the punishments of the wicked.
Chapter XXXVII.—The Testimonies of the Poets.
And that evil-doers must necessarily be punished in proportion to their deeds, has already been, as it were, oracularly uttered by some of the poets, as a witness both against themselves and against the wicked, declaring that they shall be punished. Æschylus said:—
“He who has done must also suffer.”
And Pindar himself said:—
“It is fit that suffering follow doing.”
So, too, Euripides:—
“The deed rejoiced you—suffering endure;	The taken enemy must needs be pain’d.”
And again:—
“The foe’s pain is the hero’s meed.”
And, similarly, Archilochus:—
“One thing I know, I hold it ever true,	The evil-doer evil shall endure.”
And that God sees all, and that nothing escapes His notice, but that, being long-suffering, He refrains until the time when He is to judge—concerning this, too, Dionysius said:—
“The eye of Justice seeing all,	Yet seemeth not to see.”
And that God’s judgment is to be, and that evils will suddenly overtake the wicked,—this, too, Æschylus declared, saying:—
“Swift-footed is the approach of fate,	And none can justice violate,	But feels its stern hand soon or late.
“’Tis with you, though unheard, unseen;	You draw night’s curtain in between,	But even sleep affords no screen.
“’Tis with you if you sleep or wake;	And if abroad your way you take,	Its still, stern watch you cannot break.
“’Twill follow you, or cross your path;	And even night no virtue hath	To hide you from th’ Avenger’s wrath.
“To show the ill the darkness flees;	Then, if sin offers joy or ease,	Oh stop, and think that some one sees!”
And may we not cite Simonides also?—
“To men no evil comes unheralded;	But God with sudden hand transforms all things.”
Euripides again:—
“The wicked and proud man’s prosperity	Is based on sand: his race abideth not;	And time proclaims the wickedness of men.”
Once more Euripides:—
“Not without judgment is the Deity,	But sees when oaths are struck unrighteously,	And when from men unwilling they are wrung.”
And Sophocles:—
“If ills you do, ills also you must bear.”
That God will make inquiry both concerning false swearing and concerning every other wickedness, they themselves have well-nigh predicted. And concerning the conflagration of the world, they have, willingly or unwillingly, spoken in conformity with the prophets, though they were much more recent, and stole these things from the law and the prophets. The poets corroborate the testimony of the prophets.
Chapter XXXVIII.—The Teachings of the Greek Poets and Philosophers Confirmatory of Those of the Hebrew Prophets.
But what matters it whether they were before or after them? Certainly they did at all events utter things confirmatory of the prophets. Concerning the burning up of the world, Malachi the prophet foretold: “The day of the Lord cometh as a burning oven, and shall consume all the wicked.” And Isaiah: “For the wrath of God is as a violent hail-storm, and as a rushing mountain torrent.” The Sibyl, then, and the other prophets, yea, and the poets and philosophers, have clearly taught both concerning righteousness, and judgment, and punishment; and also concerning providence, that God cares for us, not only for the living among us, but also for those that are dead: though, indeed, they said this unwillingly, for they were convinced by the truth. And among the prophets indeed, Solomon said of the dead, “There shall be healing to thy flesh, and care taken of thy bones.” And the same says David, “The bones which Thou hast broken shall rejoice.” And in agreement with these sayings was that of Timocles:—
“The dead are pitied by the loving God.”
And the writers who spoke of a multiplicity of gods came at length to the doctrine of the unity of God, and those who asserted chance spoke also of providence; and the advocates of impunity confessed there would be a judgment, and those who denied that there is a sensation after death acknowledged that there is. Homer, accordingly, though he had said,—
“Like fleeting vision passed the soul away,”
says in another place:—
“To Hades went the disembodied soul;”
And again:—
“That I may quickly pass through Hades’ gates,	Me bury.”
And as regards the others whom you have read, I think you know with sufficient accuracy how they have expressed themselves. But all these things will every one understand who seeks the wisdom of God, and is well pleasing to Him through faith and righteousness and the doing of good works. For one of the prophets whom we already mentioned, Hosea by name, said, “Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein.” He, then, who is desirous of learning, should learn much. Endeavour therefore to meet [with me] more frequently, that, by hearing the living voice, you may accurately ascertain the truth.
