Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus
(Approved by Pope Leo XIII, April 2, 1899.)
LORD, have mercy on us.	Christ, have mercy on us.	Lord, have mercy on us.	Christ, hear us.	Christ, graciously hear us.	God, the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.	God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.	God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.	Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, Son of the eternal Father, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, formed by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mother, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, substantially united to the Word of God, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, of infinite majesty, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, sacred temple of God, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, tabernacle of the Most High, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, house of God and gate of heaven, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, burning furnace of charity, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, abode of justice and love, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, full of goodness and love, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, abyss of all virtues, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, most worthy of all praise, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, king and center of all hearts, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, in whom dwells the fulness of divinity, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, in whom the Father was well pleased, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, of whose fulness we have all received, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, desire of the everlasting hills, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, patient and most merciful, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, enriching all who invoke Thee, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, fountain of life and holiness, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, propitiation for our sins, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, loaded down with opprobrium, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, bruised for our offences, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, obedient unto death, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, pierced with a lance, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, source of all consolation, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, our life and resurrection, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, our peace and reconciliation, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, victim for sin, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, salvation of those who trust in thee, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, hope of those who die in Thee, have mercy on us.	Heart of Jesus, delight of all the saints, have mercy on us.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear us, O Lord.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us, O Lord.	V. Jesus, meek and humble of Heart:	R. Make our hearts like unto Thine.
Let us pray
O ALMIGHTY and eternal God! Look upon the Heart of Thy dearly beloved Son, and upon the praise and satisfaction He offers Thee in the name of sinners and of those who seek Thy mercy; be Thou appeased, and grant us pardon in the name of the same Jesus Christ, Thy Son; who liveth and reigneth with Thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.
Indulgence. 300 days. (Leo XIII, April 2, 1899.)
