The Litany of Loreto
In Honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary
LORD, have mercy on us.	Christ, have mercy on us.	Lord, have mercy on us,	Christ, hear us.	Christ, graciously hear us.	God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.	God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.	God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.	Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.	Holy Mary, pray for us.	Holy Mother of God, pray for us.	Holy Virgin of virgins, pray for us.	Mother of Christ, pray for us.	Mother of divine grace, pray for us.	Mother most pure, pray for us.	Mother most chaste, pray for us.	Mother inviolate, pray for us.	Mother undefiled, pray for us.	Mother most amiable, pray for us.	Mother most admirable, pray for us.	Mother of good counsel, pray for us.	Mother of our Creator, pray for us.	Mother of our Redeemer, pray for us.	Virgin most prudent, pray for us.	Virgin most venerable, pray for us.	Virgin most renowned, pray for us.	Virgin most powerful, pray for us.	Virgin most merciful, pray for us.	Virgin most faithful, pray for us.	Mirror of justice, pray for us.	Seat of wisdom, pray for us.	Cause of our joy, pray for us.	Spiritual vessel, pray for us.	Vessel of honor, pray for us.	Singular vessel of devotion, pray for us.	Mystical rose, pray for us.	Tower of David, pray for us.	Tower of ivory, pray for us.	House of gold, pray for us.	Ark of the covenant, pray for us.	Gate of heaven, pray for us.	Morning star, pray for us.	Health of the sick, pray for us.	Refuge of sinners, pray for us.	Comforter of the afflicted, pray for us.	Help of Christians, pray for us.	Queen of angels, pray for us.	Queen of patriarchs, pray for us.	Queen of prophets, pray for us.	Queen of apostles, pray for us.	Queen of martyrs, pray for us.	Queen of confessors, pray for us.	Queen of virgins, pray for us.	Queen of all saints, pray for us.	Queen conceived without original sin, pray for us.	Queen of the most holy rosary, pray for us.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear us, O Lord.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us, O Lord.	V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God:	R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.
Let us pray
POUR forth, we beseech Thee, O Lord, Thy grace into our hearts, that we, to whom the incarnation of Christ Thy Son was made known by the message of an angel, may by His passion and cross be brought to the glory of His resurrection. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.
V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God.	R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.
Let us pray
VOUCHSAFE, O Lord, that we may be helped by the merits of Thy most holy Mother's spouse; that what of ourselves we can not obtain may be given us through his intercession. Who livest and reignest, world without end. Amen.
Indulgence. (1) 300 days, every time. (2) A plenary indulgence on the following five feasts of the Blessed Virgin: Immaculate Conception, Nativity, Purification, Annunciation, and Assumption; under the usual conditions, to all who shall have said it daily during the year. (Pius VII, September 30, 1817.) These indulgences are granted for the litany alone; hence the prayers following it may be omitted.
