Litany of the Fourteen Holy Helpers
LORD, have mercy on us.	Christ, have mercy on us.	Lord, have mercy on us.	Christ, hear us.	Christ, graciously hear us.	God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.	God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.	God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.	Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.	Holy Mary, queen of martyrs, pray for us.	St. Joseph, helper in all needs, pray for us.	Fourteen Holy Helpers, pray for us.	St. George, valiant martyr of Christ, pray for us.	St. Blase, zealous bishop and benefactor of the poor, pray for us.	St. Erasmus, mighty protector of the oppressed, pray for us.	St. Pantaleon, miraculous exemplar of charity, pray for us.	St. Vitus, special protector of chastity, pray for us.	St. Christophorus, mighty intercessor in dangers, pray for us.	St. Dionysius, shining mirror of faith and confidence, pray for us.	St. Cyriacus, terror of hell, pray for us.	St. Achatius, helpful advocate in death, pray for us.	St. Eustachius, exemplar of patience in adversity, pray for us.	St. Giles, despiser of the world, pray for us.	St. Margaret, valiant champion of the Faith, pray for us.	St. Catherine, victorious defender of the Faith and of purity, pray for us.	St. Barbara, mighty patroness of the dying, pray for us.	All ye Holy Helpers, pray for us.	All ye saints of God, pray for us.	In temptations against faith, pray for us.	In adversity and trials, pray for us.	In anxiety and want, pray for us.	In every combat, pray for us.	In every temptation, pray for us.	In sickness, pray for us.	In all needs, pray for us.	In fear and terror, pray for us.	In dangers of salvation, pray for us.	In dangers of honor, pray for us.	In dangers of reputation, pray for us.	In dangers of property, pray for us.	In dangers by fire and water, pray for us.	Be merciful, spare us, O Lord!	Be merciful, graciously hear us, O Lord!	From all sin, deliver us, O Lord.	From Thy wrath, deliver us, O Lord.	From the scourge of earthquake, deliver us, O Lord.	From plague, famine, and war, deliver us, O Lord.	From lightning and storms, deliver us, O Lord.	From a sudden and unprovided death, deliver us, O Lord.	From eternal damnation, deliver us, O Lord.	Through the mystery of Thy holy incarnation, deliver us, O Lord.	Through Thy birth and Thy life, deliver us, O Lord.	Through Thy cross and passion, deliver us, O Lord.	Through Thy death and burial, deliver us, O Lord.	Through the merits of Thy blessed Mother Mary, deliver us, O Lord.	Through the merits of the Fourteen Holy Helpers, deliver us, O Lord.	On the Day of Judgment, deliver us, O Lord!	We sinners, beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou spare us, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou pardon us, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou convert us to true penance, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou give and preserve the fruits of the earth, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou protect and propagate Thy holy Church, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou preserve peace and concord among the nations, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou give eternal rest to the souls of the departed, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That Thou come to our aid through the intercession of the Holy Helpers, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. George Thou preserve us in the Faith, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Blase Thou confirm us in hope, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Erasmus Thou enkindle in us Thy holy love, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Pantaleon Thou give us charity for our neighbor, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Vitus Thou teach us the value of our soul, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Christophorus Thou preserve us from sin, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Dionysius Thou give us tranquillity of conscience, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Cyriacus Thou grant us resignation to Thy holy will, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Eustachius Thou give us patience in adversity, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Achatius Thou grant us a happy death, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Giles Thou grant us a merciful judgment, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Margaret Thou preserve us from hell, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Catherine Thou shorten our purgatory, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of St. Barbara Thou receive us in heaven, we beseech Thee, hear us.	That through the intercession of all the Holy Helpers Thou wilt grant our prayers, we beseech Thee, hear us.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, spare us, O Lord.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, graciously hear us, O Lord.	Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, have mercy on us, O Lord.
V. Pray for us, ye Fourteen Holy Helpers.
R. That we may be made worthy of the promise of Christ.
Let us Pray
ALMIGHTY and eternal God, who hast bestowed extraordinary graces and gifts on Thy saints George, Blase, Erasmus, Pantaleon, Vitus, Christophorus, Dionysius, Cyriacus, Eustachius, Achatius, Giles, Margaret, Catherine, and Barbara, and hast illustrated them by miracles; we beseech Thee to graciously hear the petitions of all who invoke their intercession. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.
O God, who didst miraculously fortify the Fourteen Holy Helpers in the confession of the Faith; grant us, we beseech Thee, to imitate their fortitude in overcoming all temptations against it, and protect us through their intercession in all dangers of soul and body, so that we may serve Thee in purity of heart and chastity of body. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.
INVOCATION OF THE HOLY HELPERS
FOURTEEN Holy Helpers, who served God in humility and confidence on earth and are now in the enjoyment of His beatific vision in heaven; because you persevered till death you gained the crown of eternal life. Remember the dangers that surround us in this vale of tears, and intercede for us in all our needs and adversities. Amen.
Fourteen Holy Helpers, select friends of God, I honor you as mighty intercessors, and come with filial confidence to you in my needs, for the relief of which I have undertaken to make this novena. Help me by your intercession to placate God's wrath, which I have provoked by my sins, and aid me in amending my life and doing penance. Obtain for me the grace to serve God with a willing heart, to be resigned to His holy will, to be patient in adversity and to persevere unto the end, so that, having finished my earthly course, I may join you in heaven, there to praise for ever God, who is wonderful in His saints. Amen.
