An Act Of Thanksgiving
"And having sung a hymn they went out." The apostles did not quit the room until they had previously testified their gratitude for so signal a favour: and it is our Saviour himself who showed them the example; for when he was just going to bless and consecrate the bread, he lifted up his eyes to his heavenly Father, to return him thanks for having bestowed this favour upon mortals: "And giving thanks, he blessed, and broke," &c. Conclude your Communion, in like manner, with the most tender effusions of gratitude to God.
When I reflect, O Lord, on the many favours thou hast conferred on me, I am overwhelmed with confusion, and feel my heart penetrated with such deep sentiments of gratitude, as cannot be expressed. I find myself, as it were, encompassed on all sides, and pressed by thy goodness. It is thou thyself, O Lord, that lovest me, in all those creatures from whom I receive any benefit or advantage. My parents, from whom I received my existence, or my friends, who have given me such proofs of their tenderness, are but the instruments of thy providence, and the channels of thy mercies in my behalf. Thou art not only the God of the universe, but thou art also, in a particular way, my God! So interested art thou in all that relates to me, that thy attention seems as if it were entirely fixed on me alone. Thou hast given me all thou hast made, all that I am, and all that thou art thyself, cannot I, therefore, with as much reason as David, call thee "the God of my salvation and my mercy; my refuge and my support; my treasure and my inheritance?" Nay, more, dost thou not at present vouchsafe to become my very subsistence, by not only giving thyself to fortify my weakness, and as a pledge of eternal life, but also that I may be nourished with thy very flesh and blood? How great, therefore, must my ingratitude be, if I do not make a cordial return for such infinite love. O my God, suffer me sooner to forget myself, than to be ever unmindful of this great favour. Although I have been treacherous, fearful, and a prevaricator, yet I shall never be guilty of ingratitude, since I should blush at this vice even in my commerce with men. But still, what return can I make thee, being of myself insolvent, indigent, and miserable? Behold! the treasure is at hand; the gift I have now received from thee enables me to repay thee for all thy other benefits: the sacrifice of all that I am or have, is not worthy to be presented to thee; but in offering thee thyself, I consider my debts as abundantly discharged. May thy infinite merits be for ever exalted for having given me such excellent means of repaying to the full, the infinite obligations I owe thee.—"What return shall I make to the Lord for all those things which he has given unto me?"—Psalm cxv. "He hath made a memorial of his wonderful works, being a merciful and gracious Lord: he hath given food to them that fear him."—Psalm xc.
Do not limit the devotion of this day to the foregoing prayers, but rather consider it as entirely consecrated to Jesus Christ; that by this means you may literally accomplish the precept of the Holy Ghost: "Let no part of a good day escape without profit."—Ecclesiastes xiv. Recollect frequently this great action, and read some pious book, to nourish and enliven a spirit of devotion. Remark (or, if convenient write down) some of those tender sentiments and good resolutions with which you were affected at the time of communion; the recollection of them will serve as a bulwark to guard you against the attacks of tepidity or dryness. But, above all, endeavour to regulate your conduct for the time to come, in such a manner as to be enabled to say, with St. Paul: "I live, not I, but Christ Jesus liveth in me." In a word, let your Redeemer only, for the future, think, speak, and act in you; and let nothing remain in you that is unworthy of him, for no scandal can be more injurious to our holy religion, than for Catholics, after communicating, to lead disedifying and unchristian lives.
