The Thirty-seventh Psalm
The Psalmist, in sickness, and neglected by his friends, begs of God to pardon his sins, and to assist and heal him.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy indignation, nor chastise me in thy wrath.
For thy arrows are fastened in me: and thy hand hath been strong upon me.
There is no health in my flesh, because of thy wrath: there is no peace in my bones, because of my sins.
For mine iniquities are gone over my head: and, as a weighty burden, are become heavy upon me.
My sores are putrefied and corrupted, because of my foolishness.
I am become miserable, and am bowed down even to the end: I walked sorrowful all the day.
For my loins are filled with illusions: and there is no health in my flesh.
I am afflicted and humbled exceedingly: I roared in the groaning of my heart.
O Lord, my desire is before thee: and my sighing is not hidden from thee.
My heart is troubled, my strength hath left me: and the light of mine eyes itself is not with me.
My friends and my neighbours have drawn near, and stood up against me.
And they that were near me stood afar off: and they that sought my soul used violence.
And they that sought evils to me, spoke vain things: and studied deceits all the day long.
But I, as one deaf, did not hear: and as one dumb, that opened not his mouth.
And I became as a man that heareth not: and that hath no reproof in his mouth.
For in thee, O Lord, have I hoped: thou wilt hear me, O Lord, my God.
For I said, lest at any time mine enemies rejoice over me: and whilst my feet are moved, they speak great things against me.
For I am prepared for scourges, and my sorrow is always in my sight.
For I will declare my iniquity: and I will think of my sin.
But my enemies live, and are become stronger than I: and they are multiplied who hate me unjustly.
And they that return evil for good have detracted me, because I followed goodness.
Forsake me not, O Lord, my God: depart not thou from me.
Come unto my aid, O Lord, the God of my salvation. Glory, &c.
