The Fiftieth Psalm
The Psalmist begs pardon for the sins of adultery and murder, not through the Mosaic sacrifices, but through Christ, who was to come and establish his church, and by his sacrifice appease the injured justice of God.
Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy: and according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my iniquity.
Wash me yet more and more from my iniquity: and cleanse me from my sin.
Because I know my iniquity: and my sin is always before me.
Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil before thee: that thou mayest be justified in thy words, and mayest overcome when thou art judged.
For behold I was conceived in iniquities: and in sins hath my mother conceived me.
For behold thou hast loved truth: the secret and hidden things of thy wisdom thou hast made known to me.
Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
To my hearing thou shalt give joy and gladness: and the bones that are humble shall rejoice.
Turn away thy face from my sins: and blot out all my iniquities.
Create in me a clean heart, O God: and renew an upright spirit within my bowels.
Cast me not away from thy face: and take not thy holy spirit from me.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: and confirm me with a perfect spirit.
I will teach thy ways to the unjust: and sinners shall be converted to thee.
Deliver me from blood, O God, the God of my salvation: and my tongue shall extol thy justice.
Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips: and my mouth shall declare thy praise.
For if thou hadst desired sacrifice, verily I had given it: with burnt offerings thou wilt not be delighted.
A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrite and humble heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.
Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good will with Sion: that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up.
Then shalt thou accept the sacrifices of justice, oblations, and whole-burnt offerings: then shall they lay calves upon thine altar.
Glory, &c.
