The Hundred-and-First Psalm
The Psalmist begs for mercy upon Sion, that he will raise out of it his church, to which kings and people may come and praise God.—A prayer of the poor man, when he was anxious, and poured out his supplications before the Lord.
O Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.
Turn not away thy face from me: in what day soever I am in tribulation, incline thine ear to me.
In what day soever I shall call upon thee, hear me speedily.
For my days are vanished like smoke: and my hones are withered like fuel for the fire.
I am smitten, and my heart is withered like grass: because I forgot to eat my bread.
Through the voice of my groaning, by bones have cleaved to my flesh.
I am become like a pelican of the wilderness: I am become like a night raven in the house.
I have watched, and am become as solitary as a sparrow upon the house-top.
My enemies upbraided me all the day long: and they that praised me swore against me.
For I did eat ashes like bread: and mingled my drink with my tears.
Because of thy wrath and indignation: for having lifted me up, thou hast cast me down.
My days have declined like a shadow: and I am withered like grass.
But thou, O Lord, remainest for ever: and thy memory is from generation to generation.
Thou shalt arise and have mercy on Sion: for the time to have mercy on it is come.
For the stones thereof have pleased thy servants: and they shall have pity on the earth thereof.
And the Gentiles shall fear thy name, O Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.
For the Lord hath built up Sion: and he shall be seen in his glory.
He hath regard to the prayer of the humble: and he hath not despised their petition.
Let these things be written unto another generation: and a people to be created shall praise the Lord.
Because he hath looked forth from his high sanctuary: the Lord from heaven hath looked down upon the earth;
That he might hear the groans of them that are in fetters: that he might unbind the children of them that are slain.
That they may declare the name of the Lord in Sion: and his praise in Jerusalem.
In the assembling of the people together in one; and kings to serve the Lord.
He answered me in the way of his strength: Declare unto me the fewness of my days.
Call me not back in the midst of my days: thy years are from generation unto generation.
In the beginning, O Lord, thou didst found the earth: and the heavens are the works of thy hands.
They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they shall all grow old as a garment.
And as a vestment thou shalt change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art always the self-same, and thy years shall not fail.
The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall be directed for ever.
Glory, &c.
