Let Us Pray
O God, whose property it is, always to have mercy and to spare, receive our petitions, that we and all thy servants, who are bound by the chain of sin, may, by the compassion of thy goodness, mercifully be absolved.
Hear, we beseech thee, O Lord, the prayers of thy suppliants, and pardon our sins, who confess them to thee; that of thy bounty thou mayest grant us pardon and peace.
Out of thy clemency, O Lord, show us thy unspeakable mercy; that so thou mayest both acquit us of our sins, and deliver us from the punishment we deserve for them.
O God, who by sin art offended, and by repentance pacified, mercifully regard the prayers of thy people who make supplication to thee, and turn away the scourges of thy anger, which we deserve for our sins.
O almighty and eternal God, have mercy on thy servant (N.) our chief Bishop, and direct him, according to thy clemency, in the way of everlasting salvation, that by thy grace he may desire the things that are agreeable to thy will, and perform them with all his strength.
O God, from whom are all holy desires, righteous counsels, and just works, give to thy servants that peace which the world cannot give; that our hearts being disposed to keep thy commandments, and the fear of enemies taken away, the times, by thy protection, may be peaceable.
Inflame, O Lord, our reins and hearts with the fire of thy holy spirit, that we may serve thee with a chaste body, and please thee with a clean heart.
O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all the faithful, give to the souls of thy servants departed the remission of all their sins, that by pious supplications they may obtain the pardon they have always desired.
Model, we beseech thee, O Lord, our actions by thy holy inspirations, and carry them on by thy gracious assistance; that every prayer and work of ours may always begin from thee, and by thee be happily ended.
O almighty and eternal God, who hast dominion over the living and the dead, and art merciful to all whom thou foreknowest shall be thine by faith and good works; we humbly beseech thee, that they for whom we have purposed to offer our prayers, whether this present world still detains them in the flesh, or the next world hath already received them, divested of their bodies, may, by the clemency of thine own goodness, and the intercession of thy saints, obtain pardon and full remission of all their sins; through our Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.
R. Amen.
V. May the Lord be with you:
R. And with thy spirit.
V. May the almighty and merciful Lord graciously hear us:
R. Amen,
V. May the souls of the faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in peace:
R. Amen.
