Third Article
"Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary."—We are now to meditate on the wonderful mystery of the incarnation and temporal nativity of the Son of God. When the fulness of time appointed for the redemption of mankind was come, the second Person of the blessed Trinity assumed our flesh in the womb of his blessed Mother; that the divine and human nature being thus united in his person, he might be capable of satisfying divine justice for the injury which God had received by sin. He became man for our salvation, not in the ordinary way, but after a supernatural and incomprehensible manner, by the operation of the Holy Ghost. But although the incarnation, considered particularly as a work of divine mercy, goodness and love, be particularly attributed to the Holy Ghost, and although the three Persons of the blessed Trinity, essentially possessing the same undivided powers, have equally concurred therein, yet this wonderful work was effected only by the second Person: his sacred body was formed of the most pure blood of his Virgin Mother, without the least violation of her virginal integrity, and a most perfect soul was created to animate his body. Being thus miraculously conceived, he was also, after the space of nine months, miraculously born in a stable at Bethlehem, under the reign of Augustus Cæsar. As man, being at the same time true God, he subjected himself to all our infirmities and miseries, sin only excepted, of which he was incapable. At so early a period as at his very first entrance into the world, he was pleased to suffer for us, and to give us, in his tender infancy, the most perfect example of poverty, humility, and mortification; that he might thereby manifest to us the infinite riches of his mercy and goodness, and teach us to despise the sinful vanities of the world. He discovered himself to the shepherds by a choir of angels from heaven, to shew that he came to be the Saviour of the Jews. He manifested himself also to the Eastern Magi by a star from heaven, to shew that he was likewise come to be the Saviour of the Gentiles. He continued to live in a poor, private, and retired manner, till he was thirty years of age, when he began to preach the gospel, to cast out devils, to cure the dumb, the deaf, the lame, and blind, and to work the most stupendous miracles, in favour of a people the most ungrateful on the face of the earth. Let us not imitate them; let us rather embrace our divine Redeemer with all the affections of our souls, and ever retain a most grateful sense of the innumerable benefits he has conferred on us; devoutly saying: "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.
