Eleventh Article
"The Resurrection of the Flesh."—Let us here meditate on a third signal privilege reserved in the next life for the living members of the holy Catholic Church. On the last day there will be a general resurrection of the dead; and the whole human race, which at the fall of our first parents had been sentenced to return to their original dust, shall arise again to receive their final and irrevocable doom. As soon as the angel, by the sound of his trumpet, proclaims the awful summons, "Arise ye dead, and come to judgment!" the bodies of all the children of Adam, re-animated by their respective souls, shall instantaneously, in the "twinkling of an eye," issue forth out of their several graves and sepulchres, never more to be separated for an endless eternity. But, alas! how very different will be the manner of the resurrection of the reprobate from that of the elect! for whereas the bodies of the former shall arise in a condition suitable to their deserts, that is, foul, hideous, heavy, inactive, and only fit to be the fuel of everlasting flames, (immortal indeed they shall be, but to no other end than to endure immortal torments,) so those of the latter shall arise glorious, beautiful, immortal, and impassible, brighter than the stars, and more resplendent than the sun. This glorious state of immortality is infallibly reserved for the bodies of such Christians as in this life have been as it were consecrated by receiving the holy sacraments, and particularly the Eucharist; since Christ himself expressly declares, "He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day." O let us then frequently approach this heavenly banquet, with the proper dispositions, that thereby our bodies and souls being preserved pure from the corruption of sin, may both arise together at the last day to a happy immortality. That this may be our happy lot, let us with the most fervent devotion, say, "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.
