The Litany
Lord, have mercy on us. Christ, have mercy on us. Lord, have mercy on us. Christ, hear us. Christ graciously hear us God the Father, whose holy providence governs all things, Have mercy on us. God the Son, Redeemer of human kind, Have mercy on us. God the Holy Ghost, Have mercy on us. Holy Trinity, one God, unchangeable Providence, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, that governs all things in heaven and earth, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, that gives, preserves, and governs our life, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, the eternal love of man below and angels above, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, ever conformable to the influence of the tender heart of Jesus, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, that created, directs, and governs all things, with weight, measure, and wisdom, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, our hope, life, and salvation, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, defence and comfort of the afflicted, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, guide and support of souls in all dangers, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, that provides us with, and imparts to us, all natural and supernatural gifts, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, inexhaustible treasury Of the riches of heaven, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, protector and defence of the just, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, safe retreat and sanctuary to the miserable, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, our resource in all wants, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, our anchor in storms, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, our security in danger, our way and secure haven, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, remedy in all evils, food to the hungry, and fountain of refreshing water to the thirsty, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, raiment to the naked, strength to the weak, protector and mother to widows and orphans, Have mercy on us. Divine Providence, refuge of sinners, Have mercy on us. Providence of God, who rules all things, infinitely deserving of our homage and adoration: Spare us, O Lord, Providence of God, which protects and conserves all things, infinitely worthy of our homage and adoration: Hear us, O Lord. Providence of God, which created and knows our weakness, infinitely above our homage, and adoration: Have mercy on us, O Lord. V. We praise and adore thee, Divine Providence. R. We resign ourselves to thy just and holy designs.
