The Litany Of St. Winefrid
+
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. Lord have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord, have mercy on us. God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us. God the Son, Redeemer of mankind, have mercy on us. God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us. Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us. Holy Mary, Pray for us. Holy Mother of God, Pray for us. Holy Virgin of Virgins, Pray for us. O blessed St. Winefrid, Pray for us. O humble and mild virgin, Pray for us. O glorious spouse of Christ, Pray for us. O devout and charitable Virgin, Pray for us. O sweet comforter of the afflicted, Pray for us. O singular example of chastity, Pray for us. O radient star, Pray for us. O fairest flower of the British nation, Pray for us. O admirable and elected vessel, Pray for us. O mirror of chastity, Pray for us. O mirror of devotion, Pray for us. O mirror of piety, Pray for us. O bright lamp of sanctity, Pray for us. O golden image of angelic purity, Pray for us. O hope and safety of distressed pilgrims, Pray for us. That we may be delivered from all iniquity, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may be delivered from all disordered passions of the mind, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may be delivered from the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devil, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may be delivered from all occasions of sin, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may be delivered from plague, famine and war, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may be delivered from the wrath of God, and eternal damnation, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we and all sinners may have true contrition, and full remission of our sins, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That all schismatics, heretics, and infidels, may be converted to the holy catholic and apostolic faith, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may always hate sin, and overcome all temptations, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may despise all worldly vanities and delights, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we all may ever fear God, and fulfil his holy will, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may have both spiritual and corporal health, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may devoutly desire chastity and purity of life, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may fervently love humility and mildness, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may delight in pious prayer, fasting, and charitable alms, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may discreetly and fervently continue in the exercise of godliness, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may cheerfully and constantly suffer for the love of Christ, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That the souls in purgatory, and all afflicted persons may obtain heavenly consolations, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That our benefactors, and all that labour to save souls, may be blessed with abundance of grace and everlasting life, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That we may enjoy true peace and endless felicity, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That God, of his abundant mercy, may vouchsafe to bless this our pilgrimage, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That by thy pious intercession, it may be to the perfect health of our souls and bodies, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. That thou wilt vouchsafe to grant our requests, O holy virgin and mother, pray for us. O blessed St. Winefrid, pray for us. Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord. Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world: Hear us, O Lord. Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us. Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. Lord have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord have mercy on us. Our Father, &c. Hail Mary, &c. V. The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spirit.
