The Golden Litany, · Briefly Commemorating Our Blessed Redeemer's Life — And Passion
Lord, have mercy upon us! Christ, have mercy upon us! Lord, have mercy upon us! God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, Have mercy upon us. God, the Son, Redeemer of the world, Have mercy upon us. God, the Holy Ghost, Sanctifier of mankind, Have mercy upon us. O sacred Trinity of Persons, in unity of essence, Have mercy upon us. O blessed Jesus, true God and true man, Have mercy upon us. Through thy power in creating heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, Have mercy upon us. Through thy goodness in making man to thine own image and likeness, Have mercy upon us. Through thy mercy in redeeming man after his fall, Have mercy upon us. Through thy unspeakable love, in making choice of the blessed Virgin Mary for thy Mother, Have mercy upon us. Through the ineffable mystery of thine Incarnation, whereby thou didst vouchsafe to unite thy divine person to our frail nature, Have mercy upon us. Through thy immaculate Conception, and nine months imprisonment within the sacred body of the blessed Virgin Mary, Have mercy upon us. Through thy blessed nativity in the poor stable at Bethlehem, Have mercy upon us. Through the hunger, cold, and the other inconveniencies thou didst endure in thy tender body, when laid in the crib between an ox and an ass, Have mercy upon us. Through thy painful circumcision, on the eighth day after thy birth, when thou didst first shed thy precious blood for our sake, Have mercy upon us. Through the adorable name of Jesus, which was then given thee, Have mercy upon us. Through the mystical offerings of gold, frankincense, and myrrh, which the wise men presented thee, whom by a miraculous star thou didst summon out of the East, to adore thee in thine infancy, Have mercy upon us. Through the oblation thou didst make of thyself to thine eternal Father, when in the temple thou wert acknowledged by Simeon and Anne, and ransomed with a pair of doves by thy poor Virgin Mother, Have mercy upon us. Through thy flight into Egypt to avoid the cruelty of king Herod, and all thou didst there suffer with thy blessed Mother and St. Joseph, Have mercy upon us. Through thy return from thence to Nazareth, and the obedience thou didst there pay to thy parents, Have mercy upon us. Through thy being lost by thy parents in Jerusalem, where thou wert again found by them, after three days' search, sitting in the temple in the midst of the doctors, Have mercy upon us. Through the sacred and hidden life thou didst lead in Nazareth, with holy Mary and Joseph, from the twelfth to the thirtieth year of thine age, Have mercy upon us. Through thy humble reception of baptism in the river Jordan by the hands of St. John, Have mercy upon us. Through thy forty days' fast in the desert, where thou didst obtain repeated victories over the three temptations of the devil, Have mercy upon us. Through thy first miracle of changing water into wine at the marriage feast of Cana, Have mercy upon us. Through the zeal which thou didst show for the honour of thy eternal Father, in casting the buyers and sellers out of the temple, Have mercy upon us. Through thy condescending to discourse with the Samaritan woman sitting at the fountain. Have mercy upon us. Through thy excessive charity in healing the young man of Capharnaum, Simon Peter's mother-in-law, and a multitude of other infirm persons, Have mercy upon us. Through the power thou didst manifest in appeasing the tempest at sea, walking on the water, and enabling St. Peter to do so likewise, Have mercy upon us. Through thy efficacious calling of Peter, Andrew, James, and John, from their boats, and Matthew from the receipt of custom, to follow thee, Have mercy upon us. Through the choice of thy twelve apostles, and the divine sermon thou didst deliver to them on the Mount, in which is exhibited the model of a perfect Christian life, Have mercy upon us. Through the mercy thou didst show to the penitent Magdalen, preferring her to the Pharisee, and pardoning her sins, Have mercy upon us. Through the sending of the apostles to preach thy gospel to the people, Have mercy upon us. Through thy miraculous feeding of five thousand persons with five loaves of bread, and four thousand with seven loaves, Have mercy upon us. Through thy appointment of Peter to be the rock on which thou wouldst build thy church, for his having confessed thee to be Christ the Son of the living God, Have mercy upon us. Through thy glorious transfiguration on Mount Thabor, in the presence of three of thy disciples, Have mercy upon us. Through thy instructing us in the virtue and efficacy of prayer, and by giving us a model thereof in the divine "Our Father," &c. Have mercy upon us. Through thy inflamed desire to redeem mankind, Have mercy upon us. Through thy meek and humble entry into Jerusalem on Palm-Sunday, riding upon an ass, Have mercy upon us. Through thy humility in washing the feet of thy disciples, even those of the traitor Judas, Have mercy upon us. Through thy ineffable love manifested in the institution of the sacrifice and sacrament of thy precious body and blood, Have mercy upon us. Through the prayer thou didst thrice repeat in the Garden of Mount Olivet, when a bloody sweat trickled down thine agonized body, Have mercy upon us. Through thy condescending to receive a kiss from the mouth of the traitor Judas, Have mercy upon us. Through thy being apprehended, bound, and brought before the tribunals of Annas and Caiphas, Have mercy upon us. Through the blows, buffets, and opprobrious usage thou didst endure the night before thy crucifixion, Have mercy upon us. Through thy presentation to the pagan judge, Pilate, in the quality of a notorious criminal, Have mercy upon us. Through thy being sent before Herod, and scornfully treated by that wicked king and his soldiers, Have mercy upon us. Through the cruel and contumelious whipping thou didst endure at the pillar, Have mercy upon us. Through the barbarous clamours of the people to have Barrabas, the murderer, released, and the innocent Jesus put to death, Have mercy upon us. Through the false accusations, suborned witnesses, slanders, and calumnies, brought against thee by the Jews, Have mercy upon us. Through the shameful stripping off thy clothes, and exposing thy naked body to the multitude, Have mercy upon us. Through the pressing of a crown of sharp pointed thorns on thy sacred head, Have mercy upon us. Through thy being clothed in a purple garment, and derided as a mock king, having a reed put into thy hand for a sceptre, Have mercy upon us. Through the scoffing salutations, insulting reflections, and scornful adorations, whereby thou wert mocked by the Jews and the soldiers, Have mercy upon us. Through their spitting on thy divine face, and striking thy sacred head, Have mercy upon us. Through thy being exposed to the people in the most lamentable condition, Pilate saying to the multitude: Behold the man! Have mercy upon us. Through the horrid clamours and repeated vociferations of the Jews, "Away with him! Crucify him!" Have mercy upon us. Through thy meek and patient hearing of the sentence of death pronounced against thee, Have mercy upon us. Through thy bearing thy heavy cross on thy sacred shoulders, Have mercy upon us. Through the painful stretching of thy naked body on the cross as on a rack, and fastening thy hands and feet thereto with gross nails, Have mercy upon us. Through the compassion thou hadst for thy sorrowful Mother, and beloved disciple, standing at the foot of thy cross, Have mercy upon us. Through thy excessive charity in praying for thy persecutors, and murderers, and in promising Paradise to the penitent thief, Have mercy upon us. Through the seven last speeches thou didst utter on the cross whilst thou wast suspended thereon for the space of three hours, Have mercy upon us. Through the vehement thirst thou didst then suffer, and the gall and vinegar which was given thee to drink, Have mercy upon us. Through thy last agony, in which thou didst commend thy blessed soul into the hands of thy heavenly Father, Have mercy upon us. Through the piercing of thy side with a lance, and the water and blood which issued therefrom, Have mercy upon us. Through the descent of thy departed soul into Limbo, to conquer the devils, and set the ancient fathers at liberty, Have mercy upon us. Through the taking down of thy dead body from the cross by Joseph, of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, in order to its burial, Have mercy upon us. Through thy glorious resurrection from death to life on the third day, Have mercy upon us. Through thy appearing to thy blessed Mother, to Mary Magdalen, to Peter and the other apostles, frequently comforting and confirming them during the space of forty days, Have mercy upon us. Through thine admirable ascension into heaven, in the sight of thy sacred Mother and thy disciples, Have mercy upon us. Through the miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost on thy apostles in the form of fiery tongues, Have mercy upon us. Through all thine actions and sufferings during thy thirty years sojourning amongst men, and by all that is pleasing to thy divine Majesty in heaven and on earth, Have mercy upon us. V, Graciously hear our prayers, O Lord. R. And let our cry come unto thee.
