The Litany Of The Sacred Heart Of Jesus
Lord, have mercy on us. Christ, have mercy on us. Lord, have mercy on us. Christ, hear us. Christ, graciously hear us. God, the Father of heaven, Have mercy on us. God, the Son, Redeemer of the world, Have mercy on us. God, the Holy Ghost, Have mercy on us. Holy Trinity, one God, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, formed in the womb of the most Blessed Virgin, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, hypostatically united to the eternal Word, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, sanctuary of the Divinity, and tabernacle of the most holy Trinity, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, temple of sanctity and fountain of all graces, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, most meek and humble, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, most chaste and obedient, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, furnace of love, and source of contrition, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, treasure of wisdom and goodness, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, throne of mercy, and abyss of all virtues, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, sorrowful in the garden, and spent with a bloody sweat, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, saturated with reproaches, and consumed for our sins, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, made obedient even unto the death of the cross, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, pierced through with a lance, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, refuge of sinners, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, fortitude of the just, and comfort of the afflicted, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, main strength of the tempted, and terror of the devils, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, sanctification of hearts, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, perseverance of the good, and hope of the dying, Have mercy on us. Heart of Jesus, joy of the blessed, and the delight of all the saints, Have mercy on us. Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, spare us, O Jesus! Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, hear us, O Jesus! Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, have mercy on us, O Jesus! V. O most sacred heart of Jesus, have mercy on us. R. That we may worthily love thee with our whole hearts.
