A Prayer Before Extreme Unction
O Lord Jesus Christ, who, in the abundance of thy mercy, hast provided powerful resources for relief in all our necessities, grant me grace to have recourse to them with such worthy dispositions that my soul may partake of all those great advantages and salutary effects which thou hast appointed in their institution. Thou hast instituted the sacrament of Extreme Unction for the benefit of the sick, who, in the extremity of life, stand in need of more graces, more helps, and more consolation, than ever. I now desire to receive this heavenly medicine, for the ends for which it has been instituted. I am willing to be anointed, as thou hast commanded by thy apostle St James. Grant, I beseech thee, that this holy Unction may produce in me all its happy fruits, by healing my soul from the ulcers of sin, by fortifying me against all temptations, by supporting me in the hour of anguish and distress, and by preparing me for a happy passage out of this life, or whatever may be thy holy will. Shouldst thou foresee that my health may be conducive to thy greater glory, and expedient for my eternal salvation, let this be the means to restore it. I absolutely submit myself to thy divine will and pleasure. I wish not to live but to serve thee. Dispose of me as thou knowest best; do with me as thou pleasest. All I desire is the accomplishment of thy most holy will. Give me health or sickness, life or death; give me whatsoever thou pleasest: not my will, O Lord, but thine be done: it is a greater happiness to fulfil thy will, than to enjoy ten thousand lives. O how happy should I be, if the destruction of my body could repair the injury I have offered to thy divine Majesty! My eyes, alas! have seen vanities; my ears have been open to detractions, to profane and unprofitable discourses; my tongue has many ways offended thee, both in speaking and tasting; my hands have contributed to my follies; my feet have often gone astray in the paths of vanity and sin. By this holy anointing, and the prayers of thy church, pardon me, O Jesus, all the sins I have ever committed by these my five senses. Let those avenues through which sin has made its way into my soul, be now shut to the world; let my eyes be open to thee alone, my Jesus; let my ears be now attentive to thy commands, and to thy call; let my tongue be solely employed in crying out for mercy; let my prayers ascend like incense in thy sight; let my hands be lifted up to heaven for pardon; let my feet walk in thy ways; and let my heart be the living temple of the Holy Ghost. Into thy hands, O dear Jesus, I commend my spirit. In thee I will live, in thee I will die, in thee I will abide, and in thee I hope to possess eternal rest and heavenly joy for ever and ever. Amen.
