Short Acts Of Virtue In Time Of Sickness
I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am a sinner; accept, therefore, of what I now suffer, in atonement for my sins. Help me to receive with submission and resignation, whatever afflictions thou shalt please to send me.
I am content to suffer here, provided thou dost spare me hereafter. I know that it is by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. I know that those who would be glorified with Jesus, must also suffer with Jesus. I am convinced, that the sufferings of this present time are not to be set in competition with the eternal glory which shall be revealed in us. I believe that the present momentary and light tribulation worketh in us, above measure, an eternal weight of glory.
I offer myself, and all that I have, or am, to thee. Do with me, my God, whatever thou pleasest. Shall I not drink the cup which my Father hath given me? Not my will, but thine be done.
O sweetness of my heart, and love of my soul! take off my heart and thought from this world, that all my comfort may be in thee. O when will thy kingdom come? O Lord, when wilt thou perfectly reign in all hearts? when shall sin be no more? Wound my heart with thy love, that it may relish nothing that is earthly. O that I had never offended so good a God! O that I had never sinned! Happy those souls that have always preserved their baptismal innocence.
O my God, all my hopes are in thee.—Through Jesus Christ my Redeemer, I hope for mercy, grace, and salvation.
O sweet and adorable Jesus! O spotless Lamb! O innocent victim! who by thy passion and death hath effaced the sins of mankind, blot out my iniquities, and do not permit that thy sufferings should become useless to me.
Look, O God, on this poor piece of clay, and help me in my distress. O my Jesus! I love thee; I love thee above all things, and desire to love thee alone, because thou alone art worthy of my love.
I cast myself into the arms of thy holy love. I abandon myself entirely to thy blessed will. My unworthiness humbles and confounds me; but the sight of thy wounds, O Jesus, proclaims aloud how great thy mercy is, and how far it exceeds my misery.
O boundless love of my Jesus! inflame my heart with thy heavenly fire. Consume in me all earthly affections, and confirm my soul in thy holy love for ever.
O Jesus, torn with stripes, pierced with thorns, and weltering in blood, for my sake! teach me to endure for the love of thee, the anguish and inconvenience of my infirmities and sickness.
O Jesus, raised upon the cross, attract me now most powerfully to thyself, that my whole occupation may be to love, praise, and adore thee for ever. Hail, sacred wounds of the hands and feet of Jesus! Hail precious streams of blood, that flowed from those painful wounds! Infinite praise, honour, and glory be to thee, my amiable Redeemer, for suffering such pains for the love of me. Ah, how does it pierce my heart with sorrow, to contemplate thee, and to consider the torments thou didst suffer for my salvation.
Hail, sacred wound of the side of Jesus! hail, blessed passage to the sacred heart of my divine Redeemer! O that I could contemplate thee with the love of a Magdalen, and melt into tears of sweet devotion in honor of thee! By the sacred wounds of thy hands, of thy feet, and of thy side; by the precious streams that flowed from them; by thy blessed heart, burning with love for me; I beg and beseech thee never to forsake me, but to grant me whatever thou seest necessary for the sanctification of my soul.
Glory be to the Father, who by his power hath brought me forth from nothing, and made me to his own image and likeness. Glory be to the Son, who by his wisdom hath delivered me from hell, and opened for me the gates of Heaven. Glory be to the Holy Ghost, who by his mercy hath sanctified me in baptism, and still continues to sanctify me by the graces which I daily receive. Glory be the three adorable persons of the blessed Trinity. O may I behold and glorify eternally in heaven, what I believe, adore, and worship on earth—one God and three Persons, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.
"Here we have no permanent city:	but we seek that which is to come."	Hebrews xiii. 14.
"While we are in the body we are strangers from the Lord."	2 Corinthians v. 6.
"Whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord."	Romans xiv. 8.
