Preparation for Death · Instruction
The last moments of a Christian are not only the most precious of his life, but to him of the greatest importance, as on them depends his eternal lot. It is then Satan uses his utmost efforts to accomplish the ruin of a soul. His snares and batteries are more subtle and violent at the extremity, than at any other period, of life; for it is then, as the apostle says, (Revelation xii.) "he cometh down, having great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time." Hence it becomes the indispensable duty of every soldier of Jesus Christ, frequently to exercise himself in acts of faith, hope, charity, confidence, fortitude, and perseverance; that by the familiar use of these spiritual weapons during life, he may be enabled to encounter the mortal enemy of his soul in his last conflict, and defeat all his malicious designs.	When the disorder of a sick person has the appearance of danger, every spiritual help should be offered him before he loses the use of his senses; for which reason it would be very unfriendly to flatter him with the hopes of recovery, or to be negligent in exhorting him to make the best use of the little time which perhaps he has to live, in preparing for his voyage to eternity; and since a truly penitential spirit is the best security to a Christian in life or death, he ought to be urged to secure it to himself by the most perfect acts of compunction, resignation, faith, hope, and divine love. For this purpose he should keep himself as much as possible in the divine presence, and in the blessed company of Jesus Christ, the perfect model of suffering Christians. He should converse frequently with him, cast himself in spirit at his feet, like Magdalen; bewail his sins in the bitterness of his soul, and cry out for mercy while there is yet time for mercy. He should place a crucifix, or picture of his crucified Redeemer, before his eyes; think often upon his passion, his agony in the garden and on the cross; consider him nailed and fastened on that bed of sorrow, without moving either hand or foot, or having any other pillow to support his head but a crown of thorns. He should fly to his bleeding wounds, there to bathe his soul, and find a cure for all his disorders. He should be excited by these considerations to make a voluntary sacrifice of himself to the Divine Will; bear all his pains with patience; accept of death as the just punishment due to his sins; and offer it up in union with the death of Jesus Christ, that being united thereto, it may become precious in the sight of the Lord. He should frequently raise his thoughts above this world, and fix them on heaven—making it the object of his contemplation, and the centre of all his desires. He should consider what a happy thing it is to see and enjoy God eternally; and that the longer he remains here below, the more he lies exposed to the danger of offending him. Far, therefore, from being disturbed at the thoughts of quitting a wicked, treacherous, and deceitful world, he should rather endeavour to enter into the sentiments of St. Paul, who "longed to be dissolved, and to be with Jesus Christ." Instead of being sorry or unwilling to be disengaged from a frail body, subject to a thousand infirmities, he should rather, like King David, thirst after the happy hour that is to put him in possession of that eternal kingdom of glory, for the enjoyment of which he was created.	In effect, if the seafaring man long for his arrival in the port of his destination; if the military man wish for an and of the campaign, and long for the day that is to restore him to his friends, crowned with laurels, and enriched with spoils and trophies; if the wearied traveller pant after his native soil, and wish for the end of his journey; if the captive long to be freed from his chains; if the farmer, after the toils and fatigues of the winter, rejoice at the bright prospect of the approaching harvest; why should not a Christian long for the end of the laborious winter of this life, in order to reap the sweet fruits of his past labours? Why should he not be charmed with the well-grounded hope of entering into the joys of his Lord, and finding the gates of heaven open to receive his soul? Why should he not wish to be rescued out of the stormy sea of this world, and arrive safely in the harbour of eternal life? Why should he not long for the end of the spiritual warfare wherein he is constantly engaged, in order to receive that never-fading crown of glory, which is reserved in the kingdom of heaven for such as conquer? Why should he not welcome the happy hour of his death, which is to restore him to his native country, fix him in his proper habitation, secure him from the embarrassments and snares of this mortal life, and translate him to the glorious society of the holy apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and an innumerable host of heavenly citizens, who await him, and long to congratulate his happy arrival? "Which amongst us," says St. Cyprian, "who for a long time had been a sojourner in a foreign country would not anxiously desire to return to his native soil? What person would not wish for a prosperous gale of wind to waft him with expedition to his favourite home, that he might the sooner embrace his friends and relations?" Heaven is our native country; here we are but strangers, captives, and pilgrims. Here we have no permanent city; but there we shall be at home in our Fathers house. Here we are exiles and travellers, hastening to the end of our journey. This world is a tempestuous ocean, full of rocks and quicksands, wherein we are constantly tossed to and fro by storms and hurricanes, tortured between hopes and fears, and every moment exposed to the danger of being shipwrecked. "O how happy are they," continues St. Cyprian, "who, after being delivered from these storms and hurricanes, have happily arrived at the haven of everlasting bliss!" How happy are they who are removed from the dangers of sin, and freed from the assaults of the devil, and the conflict of their passions! How happy are they who are withdrawn from the miseries of this perishable life, and have put on a glorious immortality! Who would not rejoice to obtain everlasting rest, out of the reach of danger? Who would not cheerfully quit this sinful Babylon, to spend an eternity in the presence of God, and live for ever with Jesus Christ, in the company of millions of saints and angels! O blessed be that Divine Providence, that infinite goodness, which has provided a better world to receive us, and there promises us eternal life: Hence hath St. Teresa exclaimed: "O death, I know not who can fear thee, since it is by thee that we find life."	Too great a love of life betrays a want of that lively faith and confidence, which, by fortifying the mind of a Christian, enables him to stare death in the face, and despise that king of terrors. It is now more than ever incumbent on us to comply with the obligation we lie under, of suppressing inordinate self-love in our hearts, and of doing, not our own, but the will of our heavenly Father; for how inconsistent would it be to desire that his will may be done on earth, as it is in heaven, if upon summoning us to quit this world, we are reluctant and unwilling to obey his call? With what propriety can we say, thy kingdom come, whilst we evidently betray a desire of remaining here in a state of bondage to our passions and subjection to the devil, rather than accept the invitation to go and live with Jesus Christ, in the kingdom which he has purchased for us at the expense of his sacred blood. To die well or ill, is all that should give us trouble. We know for certain that death is the only way to eternal happiness; that the cross is the ladder by which we should ascend to heaven; and that through many sufferings and tribulations we must endeavour to enter into it. Christ himself died before he entered into his glory. We cannot arrive at heaven by any other road. It is the only gate to life everlasting. It is a passage from a valley of tears to a region of unspeakable bliss. It is a deliverance from a continual warfare, in which we are surrounded with a thousand dangers of perishing. It is a happy exemption from the temptation of the devil, the world, and the flesh, which are our capital enemies. Animated therefore, with a bright prospect of eternal happiness at our departure, we should consider the pangs of death as nothing else but the breaking down of that partition which stands betwixt the soul and the sight of its sovereign good.	"The body is a tottering edifice, which must necessarily fall, that the soul may be at rest. It is like the scaffolding which architects make use of to erect a palace; but which they take away after the building is finished."—Clement XIV.—Picture of Man.
