Prayers To Be Recited By The Assistants — When The Dying Person Loses The Use Of Speech
Lord Jesus Christ, we beseech thee, by thy bitter agony and prayer in the garden, that thou wouldst be pleased to be an advocate with thy eternal Father, in behalf of this thy servant: lay before him (her) all those drops of blood which in thy anguish of spirit flowed from thy body, and offer them for the remission of all his (her) sins: that in this hour of extremity, he (she) may be discharged from that hand-writing of sin which stands against him (her), and from that punishment which he (she) fears to be too justly due to his (her) sins. "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.
Lord Jesus Christ! who for our salvation was pleased to suffer death on the cross, we beseech thee to offer up all the anguish and pains thou didst then endure, and most especially at the hour of thy death, in behalf of this thy servant, that they may be accepted in his (her) favour, for the good of his (her) soul, for the obtaining of a happy hour, and for the release from that punishment which he (she) has deserved for his (her) sins. "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.
Lord Jesus Christ! who hadst such a boundless love for man as to induce thee to become man for his salvation, we beseech thee to let this thy infinite charity and goodness towards mankind, so plead in behalf of this thy poor servant, that by thy powerful mediation, his (her) soul, at the moment of its departure from the body, being freed from the bonds of sin, may find a free admittance through the gates that lead to the mansions of eternal bliss. "Our Father," &c. "Hail Mary," &c.
Lord Jesus Christ! who by thy precious blood hast redeemed us, we beseech thee to imprint deep in the soul of this thy servant the memory of thy most sacred wounds, that having them perpetually in his (her) sight, he (she) may be encouraged to suffer with patience and resolution, and be armed against all the pangs of death. Thus let him (her) cheerfully submit to all the difficulties of his (her) condition, and begin, even here, to be united to thee with a love that shall never end.
Grant him (her) now to partake of the fruit of thy holy incarnation, of thy bitter passion, of thy glorious resurrection, and admirable ascension.
Grant that he (she) may be sensible of the effects of thy holy mysteries and sacraments, and of all the prayers which are offered by the whole church.
Remember, O Lord, that thou wast once in the straits of death; and in this extremity, after crying out to thy eternal Father, and commending thy spirit to him, didst expire. Behold now this thy servant in his (her) anguish crying aloud to thee; stand thou by him (her), defend and comfort him (her) in this his (her) distress, and receive his (her) soul into thy merciful embraces.
Remember, O Jesus, that thy arms were stretched forth, thy side opened, and thy sacred head bowed down from the cross; have regard now, we beseech thee, to the soul of this thy servant, which, departing out of this world, seeks refuge in thee; receive it into thy arms, clasp it to thy breast, and there let it hide itself, secured from the attacks of all its enemies, till the anger of God pass over. Into thy hands we commend his (her) spirit, which has been created and redeemed by thee, despise not, we beseech thee, the work of thy hands.
O Christ Jesus, who was crucified for our redemption, we beseech thee, by that love which brought thee from heaven, to have compassion on the soul of thy servant; forgive him (her) all his (her) sins, and by the merits of thy bitter passion, satisfy for all his (her) failings, and supply his (her) defects; let him (her) now experience the multitude of thy tender mercies, and be sensible how good thou, O Lord, art. Dispose now his (her) soul by thy grace, that he (she) may be prepared at thy call to go forth to meet thee, his (her) heavenly bridegroom. Grant him (her), we beseech thee, true patience and perfect resignation in his (her) pains and anguish. Give him (her) full discharge from all his (her) sins; confirm his (her) faith; strengthen his (her) hope, and perfect his (her) charity; that departing hence, his (her) soul may be received into thy mercy. O dear Redeemer, by that distress which thou didst suffer on the cross, when thou criedst out to thy eternal Father, we pray thee to show mercy to this thy servant in his (her) extremity; hear the sighs and desires of his (her) heart; and since he (she) is now deprived of the faculty of speech, speak thou for him (her) we beseech thee, who art the eternal Word, and to whom the Father will refuse nothing.
By thy victory over death, and the infinite merits of thy passion, we beseech thee, on behalf of this thy servant, to have no other thoughts but of peace, of mercy and comfort, and not of affliction. Bear him (her) up against all distrust and despair; deliver him (her) from his (her) necessities, and be his (her) comforter in his (her) distress. Let those hands which were once nailed to the cross, now plead for him (her) and obtaining his (her) pardon, conduct him (her) into thy eternal rest. Amen.
