Let Us Pray
We commend to thee, O Lord, the soul of this thy servant; and beseech thee, O Jesus Christ, Redeemer of the world, that as in thy mercy to him (her) thou becamest man, so now thou mayest vouchsafe to admit him (her) into the number of the blessed. Remember, O Lord, that he (she) is thy creature, not made by strange gods, but by thee, the only true and living God; for there is no other God but thee, and none can work thy wonders. Let his (her) soul find comfort in thy sight, and remember not his (her) former sins, nor any of those excesses which he (she) has fallen into through the violence of passion and corruption. For although he (she) hath sinned, yet he (she) has still retained a true faith in thee, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; he (she) has had a zeal for thy honour, and faithfully adores thee his (her) God and Creator of all things.
Remember not, O Lord, the sins or ignorance of his (her) youth; but according to thy great mercy be mindful of him (her) in thy eternal glory. Let the heavens be opened to him (her,) and the angels rejoice with him (her). May St. Michael the archangel, the chief of the heavenly host, conduct him (her). May blessed Peter, thy apostle, to whom were given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, receive him (her.) May holy Paul thy apostle, and chosen vessel of election, assist him (her.) May St. John, thy beloved disciple, to whom were revealed the secrets of heaven, intercede for him (her.) May all thy holy apostles, to whom was given the power of binding and loosening, pray for him (her.) May all the chosen servants and martyrs of God, who in this world have suffered torments for thy sake, O Christ, intercede for him (her,) that being delivered from this body of corruption, he (she) may be admitted into the kingdom of heaven; through the assistance and merits of thee, our Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with the Father and the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.
[Should the sick person still continue in distress of agony, it may be proper for the assistants to continue on in prayer, saying Psalms xxi. cxviii.]
