The Ordinary Of The Holy Mass · Part I
The Preparation Of The Offerers, By Acts Of Humility, Praise, Faith, Etc.
The Priest beginning at the foot of the Altar, says,
In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti. Amen.
In the name of the Father, &c. Amen.
Ant. Introibo ad altare Dei.
Ant. I will go unto the altar of God.
R. Ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem meam.
R. To God, who rejoiceth my youth.
The following Psalm (42nd) is omitted in Passion time, and in Masses for the Dead.
Judica me, Deus, et discerne causam meam de gente non sancta: ab homine iniquo et doloso erne me.
Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause from the nation that is not holy: from the unjust and deceitful man deliver me.
R. Quia tu es, Deus, fortitudo mea, quare me repulisti? et quare tristis incedo, dum affligit me inimicus?
R. Since thou, O God, art my strength, why hast thou cast me off? and why do I go sorrowful, while the enemy afflicteth me?
P. Emitte lucem tuam et veritatem tuam: ipsa me deduxenmt et adduxenint in montem sanctum tuum, et in tabernacula tua.
P. Send forth thy light and thy truth: they have conducted and brought me to thy holy mount, and into thy tabernacles.
R. Et introibo ad altare Dei: ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem me am.
R. And I will go unto the altar of God; to God who rejoiceth my youth.
P. Confitebor tibi in cithara, Deus, Deus, meus: quare tristis es, anima mea; et quare conturbas me?
P. I will praise thee on the harp, O God, my God: why art thou sorrowful, O my soul; and why dost thou disturb me?
R. Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi: salutare vultus mei, et Deus meus.
R. Hope in God, for I will yet praise him: the salvation of my countenance, and my God.
P. Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto:
P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, &c.
R. Sicut erat in principio, et nunc, et semper, et in sæcula sæculorum. Amen.
R. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.
P. Introibo ad altare Dei.
P. I will go unto the altar of God.
R. Ad Deum qui lætificat juventutem meam.
R. To God who rejoiceth my youth.
P. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.
P. Our help is in the name of the Lord.
R. Qui fecit cœlum et terrain.
R. Who made heaven and earth.
P. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, &c.
P. I confess to almighty God, &c.
R. Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, et dimissis peccatis tuis, perducat te ad vitam æternam.
R. May almighty God be merciful to thee, and forgiving thee thy sins, bring thee to life everlasting.
P. Amen.
P. Amen.
R. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatæ Mariæ, semper virgine, beato Michaeli archangelo, beato Joanni baptistæ, Sanctis apostolis Petro et Paulo, omnibus Sanctis, et tibi, pater, quia peccavi nimis cogitatione, verbo, et opere: mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa. Ideo precor beatam Mariam semper virginem, beatum Michaelem archangelum, beatum Joannem baptistam, sanctos apostolos Petrum et Paulum, omnes sanctos, ette, pater, orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.
R. I confess to almighty God, to blessed Mary, ever virgin, to blessed Michael the archangel, to blessed John the baptist, to the holy apostles Peter and Paul, to all the saints, and to thee, O father, that I have grievously sinned in thought, word, and deed: through my fault, through my fault, through my exceeding great fault. Therefore I beseech the blessed Mary, ever virgin, blessed Michael the archangel, blessed John the baptist, the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and all the saints, and thee, O father, to pray to the Lord our God for me.
P. Misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus, et dimissis peccatis vestris, perducat vos ad vitam æternam.
R. Amen.
P. May almighty God have mercy on you, forgive you your sins, and bring you to life everlasting.
R. Amen.
P. Indulgentiam, absolutionem, et remissionem peccaturum nostrorum, tribuat nobis omnipotens et misericors Dominus.
R. Amen.
P. May the almighty and merciful Lord grant us pardon, absolution, and remission of our sins.
R. Amen.
P. Deus, tu conversus vivificabis nos.
P. O God, thou being turned towards us, wilt receive us.
R. Et plebs tua lætabitur in te.
R. And thy people shall rejoice in thee.
P. Ostende nobis, Domine, misericordiam tuam.
P. Show us thy mercy, O Lord.
R. Et salutare tuum da nobis.
R. And grant us thy salvation.
P. Domine, exaudi orationem meam.
P. O Lord, hear my prayer.
R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
R. And let my cry come unto thee.
P. Dominus vobiscum:
P. The Lord be with you:
R. Et cum spiritu tuo.
R. And with thy spirit.
When the Priest goes up to the Altar, say,
Take away from us our iniquities, we beseech thee, O Lord, that we may be worthy to assist with pure minds at the celebration of these tremendous mysteries; through Christ our Lord. Amen.
When he bows down before the Altar, say,
We beseech thee, O Lord, by the merits of thy saints, whose relics are enclosed in this altar, and of all the saints, that thou wouldst vouchsafe to forgive us all our sins. Amen.
Here at Solemn Masses, the Priest having blessed the incense with the sign of the cross, and these words, "Mayest thou be blessed by him in whose honour thou wilt be burned," fumes the altar therewith, and then turning to the book, reads the Introit, which, being different every day, may be supplied by the following prayer:
It is in thy name, O adorable Trinity! it is to honour thee, and to do thee homage, that I assist at this most holy and august sacrifice. Permit me, then, O Lord, to unite my intention with that of thy minister now at the altar, in offering up this precious victim; and give me the same sentiments I ought to have had on Mount Calvary, had I been an eye-witness of that bloody sacrifice.
