Litany Of The Holy Name Of Jesus
Lord, have mercy on us. Christ, have mercy on us. Lord, have mercy on us. Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. God the Father of heaven, Have mercy on us. God the Son, Redeemer of the World, Have mercy on us. God the Holy Ghost, Have mercy on us. Holy Trinity one God, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Son of the living God, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Splendour of the Father, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Brightness of Eternal Light, Have mercy on us. Jesus, King of Glory, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Sun of Justice, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Son of the Virgin Mary, Have mercy on us. Jesus, most amiable, Have mercy on us. Jesus, most adorable, Have mercy on us. Jesus, the mighty God, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Father of the World to come, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Angel of the Great Council, Have mercy on us. Jesus, most powerful, Have mercy on us. Jesus, most patient, Have mercy on us. Jesus, most obedient, Have mercy on us. Jesus, meek and humble of heart, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Lover of Chastity, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Lover of Peace, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Lover of us, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Author of Life, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Example of Virtues, Have mercy on us. Jesus, zealous Lover of Souls, Have mercy on us. Jesus, our God, Have mercy on us. Jesus, our Refuge, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Father of the Poor, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Treasure of the Faithful, Have mercy on us. Jesus, good Shepherd, Have mercy on us. Jesus, true Light, Have mercy on us. Jesus, eternal Wisdom, Have mercy on us. Jesus, infinite Goodness, Have mercy on us. Jesus, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Joy of Angels, Have mercy on us. Jesus, King of Patriarchs, Have mercy on us. Jesus, the Inspirer of the Prophets, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Master of the Apostles, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Teacher of the Evangelists, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Strength of Martyrs, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Light of Confessors, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Spouse of Virgins, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Crown of all Saints, Have mercy on us. Be merciful unto us, Spare us, O Lord Jesus! Be merciful unto us, Hear us, O Lord Jesus! From all sin, Lord Jesus deliver us. From thy wrath, Lord Jesus deliver us. From the snares of the devil, Lord Jesus deliver us. From the spirit of uncleanness, Lord Jesus deliver us. From everlasting death, Lord Jesus deliver us. From the neglect of thy holy inspirations, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' the mystery of thy holy incarnation, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy nativity, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy divine infancy, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy sacred life, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy labours, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy cross and passion, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy pains and torments, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy death and burial, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy glorious resurrection, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy triumphant ascension, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy joys and glory, Lord Jesus deliver us. In the day of judgment, Lord Jesus deliver us. Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord Jesus! Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Hear us, O Lord Jesus! Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us, O Lord Jesus! Jesus, Master of the Apostles, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Teacher of the Evangelists, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Strength of Martyrs, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Light of Confessors, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Spouse of Virgins, Have mercy on us. Jesus, Crown of all Saints, Have mercy on us. Be merciful unto us, Spare us, O Lord Jesus! Be merciful unto us, Hear us, O Lord Jesus! From all sin, Lord Jesus deliver us. From thy wrath, Lord Jesus deliver us. From the snares of the devil, Lord Jesus deliver us. From the spirit of uncleanness, Lord Jesus deliver us. From everlasting death, Lord Jesus deliver us. From the neglect of thy holy inspirations, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' the mystery of thy holy incarnation, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy nativity, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy divine infancy, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy sacred life, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy labours, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy cross and passion, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy pains and torments, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy death and burial, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy glorious resurrection, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy triumphant ascension, Lord Jesus deliver us. Thro' thy joys and glory, Lord Jesus deliver us. In the day of judgment, Lord Jesus deliver us. Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord Jesus! Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Hear us, O Lord Jesus! Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us, O Lord Jesus! Lord Jesus, hear us! Lord Jesus, graciously hear us!
O Lord Jesus Christ, who hast said, Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; mercifully attend to our supplications, and grant us the gift of divine charity, that we may ever love thee with our whole hearts, and never cease from praising thy holy name; who liveth and reigneth one God, world without end. Amen.
