Putting the Wine and Water into the Chalice, he says,
O God, who, in creating human nature, hast wonderfully dignified it, and still more wonderfully reformed it, grant that, by the mystery of this water and wine, we may be made partakers of his divinity, who vouchsafed to become partaker of our humanity, namely, Jesus Christ our Lord, thy Son, who, with thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth God, for ever and ever. Amen.
At Offering the Chalice, he says,
We offer thee, O Lord, the chalice of salvation, beseeching thy clemency, that it may ascend before thy divine Majesty, as a most sweet odour, for our salvation, and for that of the whole world. Amen.
The Priest humbly bowing himself, says,
Accept us, O Lord, in the spirit of humility, and contrition of heart; and grant that the sacrifice which we offer this day in thy sight, may be pleasing to thee, O Lord God.
At blessing the Bread and Wine, he says,
Come, O almighty and eternal God, the Sanctifier, and bless this sacrifice prepared for the glory of thy holy name.
Here, in solemn Masses, he blesses the Incense, saying,
May the Lord, by the intercession of the blessed Michael the Archangel, who standeth at the right side of the altar of perfumes, and of all his elect, vouchsafe to bless this incense, and receive it as an odour of sweetness: through Christ our Lord. Amen.
At incensing the Bread and Wine, he says,
May this incense which thou hast blessed, O Lord, ascend to thee, and may thy mercies descend upon us.
At incensing the Altar, he says, Psalm cxl.
Let my prayer ascend, O Lord, like incense, in thy sight; and the lifting up of my hands, as an evening sacrifice: place, O Lord, a guard upon my mouth, and a gate of prudence before my lips; that my heart may not wander after words of malice, to seek excuses in sin.
Giving the Censer to the Deacon, he says,
May the Lord enkindle within us the fire of his love, and the flames of everlasting charity. Amen.
At washing his Hands, he says, Psalm xxv. 6.
I will wash my hands among the innocent; and go up to thy altar, O Lord, that I may hear the voice of praise: and publish all thy wonderful works. O Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house, and the place where thy glory dwelleth. Destroy not my soul with the impious: nor my life with men of blood. In whose hands are iniquities: their right hand is filled with bribes. But I have walked in mine innocence: rescue me, and have mercy on me. My feet have stood in the right path: in the assembly of the faithful I will bless thee, O Lord. Glory, &c.
Bowing in the midst of the Altar, he says,
Accept, O holy Trinity, this oblation which we make thee, in memory of the passion, resurrection, and ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ; and in honour of the ever blessed Virgin Mary, the blessed John Baptist, the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and all the saints, that it may be available to their honour and to our salvation. And may they vouchsafe to intercede for us in heaven, whose memory we celebrate on earth: through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.
Turning himself towards the People, he says,
Brethren, pray that my sacrifice and yours may be acceptable in the sight of God the Father Almighty.
R. May the Lord receive the sacrifice from thy hands, to the praise and glory of his own name, and to our benefit, and that of all his holy church.
When the Priest says the Secret Prayer in a low voice, which differs every day, you may say as follows:
Mercifully hear our prayers, O Lord, and graciously accept this oblation, which we thy servants are making to thee; that as we offer it to the honour of thy name, so it may be to us a means of obtaining thy grace in this life, and in the next everlasting happiness: through, &c.
P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.
P. World without end.
R. Amen.
R. Amen.
