The Preface
P. Dominus vobiscum:
P. The Lord be with you:
R. Et cum spiritu tuo.
R. And with thy spirit.
P. Sursum corda.
P. Raise up your hearts on high.
R. Habemus ad Dominum.
R. We have raised them to the Lord.
P. Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro.
P. Let us give thanks to the Lord our God.
R. Dignum et justum est.
R. It is meet and just.
The Preface for all the Sundays in the year, except from Christmas to the Octave of the Epiphany, and from Ash-Wednesday to Whit-Sunday, inclusively.
It is truly meet, just, right, and available to salvation, that we should always and in all places give thanks to thee, O holy Lord, Father almighty, eternal God, who, together with thine only begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, art one God and one Lord; not in a singularity of one person, but in a trinity of one substance. For what, according as thou hast revealed, we believe of thy glory, the same we believe of the Son, the same we believe of the Holy Ghost, without any difference or distinction. So that in the confession of the true and eternal deity, we adore a distinction in the person, an unity in the essence, and an equality in the majesty; which the angels and archangels, the cherubim, and likewise the seraphim, praise, and cease not daily to cry out with united voice, saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Hosts.	The heavens and the earth are full of thy glory.	Hosanna to him who is on high.	Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.	Hosanna to him who is on high.
The Common Preface for Festivals which have none proper, and in Masses for the Dead.
It is truly meet and just, right and available to salvation, that we should always, and in all places, give thanks to thee, O holy Lord, Father almighty, eternal God, through Christ our Lord; by whom the angels praise thy Majesty; the dominations adore it; the powers tremble before it; the heavens, the heavenly host, and blessed seraphim, with common jubilee glorify it: together with whom we humbly beseech thee to admit our voices of praise, saying in the most suppliant manner, Holy, Holy, Holy, &c. (as in the foregoing Preface for Sundays.)
