Commemoration Of The Living
Be mindful, O Lord, of thy servants, men and women, [name them.]
[Here the Priest prays awhile for those he intends to pray for:]
And of all here present, whose faith and devotion are known unto thee; for whom we offer, or who offer up to thee this sacrifice of praise for themselves, and for all that belong to them; for the redemption of their own souls; for the safety and salvation they hope for; and who now pay their vows to thee, the eternal, living, and true God.
Being united in communion with the saints, and honouring, in the first place, the memory of the glorious Mary, ever virgin, mother of our Lord Jesus Christ; as also of the blessed apostles and martyrs, Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and Thadeus, Linus, Cletus, Clement, Xystus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Laurence, Chrysogonus, John and Paul, Cosmas, and Damian, and of all thy saints; by whose merits and prayers, grant that we may on all occasions be defended by the help of thy protection: through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.
Spreading his hands over the Oblation, he says,
We therefore beseech thee, O Lord, graciously to accept this offering of our homage, as also of thy whole family: dispose our days in thy peace, preserve us from eternal damnation, and rank us in the number of thine elect: through Christ our Lord. Amen.
Which oblation do thou, O Lord, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, in all respects, to bless, approve, ratify, and accept; that it may be made to us the body and blood of thy most beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ:
Who, the day before he suffered, took bread into his sacred and venerable hands, and with his eyes lifted up towards heaven, to thee, almighty God, his father, giving thanks, he blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying:
"Take, and eat ye all of this,	for THIS IS MY BODY."
At Solemn Masses, daring the Elevation,	this Hymn is sometimes song:
O Salutaris hostia, Quæ cœli pandis ostium; Bella premunt hostilia, Da robur, fer auxilium. Uni trinoque Domino, Sit sempiterna gloria: Qui vitam sine termino, Nobis donet in patria. O saving host, that heaven's gate, Laidst open at so dear a rate; Intestine war invade our breast; Be thou our strength, support, and rest. To God the Father, and the Son, And Holy Spirit, three in one, Be endless praise: may He above. With life eternal crown our love.
After the Priest has adored and elevated the sacred Host, he proceeds:
In like manner, after he had supped, taking this most excellent chalice into his sacred and venerable hands, and giving thanks also unto thee, he blessed it, and gave it to his disciples, saying:
"Take, and drink ve all of this,	for this is the chalice of my blood,	of the new and eternal testament—	the mystery of faith, which shall be shed for you	and for many, to the remission of sins,"	"As often as ye do these things,	ye shall do them in commemoration of me."
Here, after he has adored and elevated the Chalice, he goes on:
Wherefore, we thy servants, O Lord, as also thy holy people, being mindful as well of the blessed passion of the same Christ thy Son our Lord, as of his resurrection from the dead, and his glorious ascension into heaven, offer unto thy most excellent Majesty, of thy gifts bestowed upon us, a pure host, a holy host, an immaculate host, the holy bread of eternal life, and chalice of everlasting salvation.
Upon which vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to look with a propitious and pleasing countenance, and to accept them, as thou wert pleased graciously to accept the gifts of thy just servant Abel, and the sacrifice of our patriarch Abraham, and that which thy high priest Melchisedech offered unto thee, a holy sacrifice and spotless victim.
We most humbly beseech thee, O Almighty God, that thou wouldst command these offerings to be carried by the hands of thy holy angel unto thine altar on high, in the sight of thy divine Majesty, that as many of us as assist at this oblation, or partake of the sacred body and blood of thy Son, may be filled with every heavenly grace and blessing: through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.
