Part IV. — The Communion, Or — Sacramental Part Of The Canon
Let Us Pray.
Instructed in thy saving precepts, and following thy divine directions, we presume to say:
Our Father, &c.
R. But deliver us from evil.
P. Amen.
Deliver us we beseech thee, O Lord, from all evils, past, present, and to come. And by the intercession of the blessed and ever glorious Virgin Mary, mother of God, and of the holy apostles Peter and Paul, of Andrew, and of all the saints mercifully grant peace in our days, that through the assistance of thy mercy, we may be always free from sin, and secure from all disturbance: through the same Lord Jesus Christ thy son, who liveth and reigneth with thee God, in unity with the holy Ghost.
P. Per omnia sæcula sæculorum.
P. World without end.
R. Amen.
R. Amen.
P. Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum.
P. May the peace of the Lord be always with you;
R. Et cum spiritu tuo.
R. And with thy spirit.
Breaking the Host, he puts a particle thereof into the Chalice, saying:
May this mixture together, and consecration of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus be to us that receive it, or assist thereat, effectual to eternal life. Amen.
Then bowing and striking his breast, he says thrice:
Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world,	have mercy on us.
Lamb of God who takest away the sins of the world,	have mercy on us.
Lamb of God who takest away the sins of the world,	give us peace.
In Masses for the Dead, instead of "Have mercy on us," he says, twice, "Give them rest," and lastly "Give them eternal rest." The following Prayer is also omitted:
Lord Jesus Christ who saidst to thy apostles "I leave you peace, I give you my peace," regard not my sins, but the faith of thy church, and vouchsafe to grant her that peace and unity which is agreeable to thy will; who livest and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who, according to the will of thy Father, with the co-operation of the Holy Ghost, hast, by thy death, given life to the world, deliver me by this thy most sacred body and blood, from all my iniquities, and from all evils; make me always live up to thy commandments; and never suffer me to be separated from thee, who livest and reignest with God the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.
Let not the participation of thy body, O Lord Jesus Christ, which I, though unworthy, presume to receive, turn to my judgment and condemnation; but let it, through thy mercy, become a safeguard and remedy, both of soul and body: who with God the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, livest and reignest God for ever and ever. Amen.
Kneeling, rising, and taking the Host in his hands, he says:
I will partake of this heavenly bread, and call upon the name of the Lord.
He strikes his breast, saying devoutly, thrice:
Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof; speak only the word, and my soul shall be healed.
During the time of the Priest's communicating, it would be profitable for persons who are not then in a state of actually communicating, to communicate also spiritually or in desire; for this purpose say the following prayer:
O that I were among the number of those whose sanctity allows them to communicate daily! What a happiness, O my God! could I at this moment erect a throne for thee in my heart, pay thee my homage, lay open to thee my wants, and participate in the favours thou grantest to those who really and worthily receive thee. But since I am unworthy, do thou, O Lord, supply my want of the proper dispositions. Grant the pardon of my manifold sins, which I detest from the bottom of my heart, because they displease thee. Cast thy compassionate eye upon me, and purify my soul, that the ardent wish I now conceive to be united to thee by a worthy communion may be speedily accomplished. But until the arrival of so happy a moment I earnestly entreat thee, O dearest Lord, that thou wouldst make me partaker of all those advantages which the communion of the priest may produce in those thy people. By the efficacy of this enlivening sacrament, increase my faith, strengthen my hope, revive in my soul the rays of divine charity, inflame my heart with thy love, that it may pant only for thee and live for thee alone. Amen.
Receiving reverently both parts of the Host, he says:
May the body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life everlasting. Amen.
Taking the Chalice, he says:
What return shall I make to the Lord for all the good things that he hath given unto me? I will partake of the chalice of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Praising I will call upon the Lord, and I shall be saved from mine enemies.
Receiving the Blood of our Saviour, he says:
May the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life everlasting. Amen.
Taking the first Ablution, he says:
Grant, Lord, that what we have partaken of with our mouth, we may receive with purity of mind; and that of a temporal gift it may become unto us an everlasting remedy. Amen.
Taking the second Ablution, he says:
May thy body, O Lord, which I have received, and thy blood which I have drank, cleave to my soul: and grant that no stain of sin remain within me, who have been fed with this pure and holy sacrament. Who livest and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.
Having wiped his Mouth, his Fingers, and the Chalice, he then continues the Mass.	The Communion being every day different, what follows may be said:
Let it be now, O Lord, an effect of thy mercy, that we who have been present at this holy mystery may find the benefit thereof in our souls.
