Prayer After The Elevation
Behold, O almighty and all-gracious God, thy Son, Jesus, in whom thou art well pleased. Look upon the face of thy Christ and my Saviour, here present. Look upon this spotless lamb, this adorable victim, this pure holocaust of obedience, humbled to the very death of the cross. Behold in him what may move thee to look down upon us with an eye of mercy, and to forgive us our sins. He is our High Priest, sprinkled with his own blood. Receive the sacrifice he has offered for us, in consideration of all the honours and homages that are due to thy sovereign goodness from me and all creatures. Extend, O compassionate Creator, the virtue of it unto the souls in the church suffering, and grant to the faithful departed rest and life everlasting, particularly to N.; mitigate their punishment, and translate them to that state of glory for which thou hast designed them. Thou hast formerly promised, that looking on thy rainbow thou wouldst remember the covenant made between thee and the patriarch Noah, (Genes, ix.); canst thou then look down on the blood of thy beloved Son Jesus, offered here to thee in sacrifice, and not remember the great covenant of the new law, sealed and confirmed with the effusion of his sacred blood?
O dear Jesus! that I could love thee as thy goodness deserves. The more thou hast humbled thyself for my sake, the more I am bound to love thee. Remember thou hast bought me at a dear rate. O let not thy blood be lost or spilt in vain for me; but receive me into the number of the elect. I detest my sins, which were the cause of thy sufferings, and thy most cruel executioners. My crimes, alas! were the nails that bored thy hands and feet, and fastened thee to an ignominious cross. O who will give sorrow to my heart, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, that I may bewail them in the bitterness of my soul all the days of my life, and that at the hour of my departure I may, by means of a true conversion, be entitled to hear those comfortable words which thou saidst to the penitent thief on the cross: This day shalt thou be with me in paradise. I acknowledge my unworthiness, I do not deserve to be ranked among the number of thy children, yet I will presume to say that heavenly prayer which thou hast taught me: "Our Father, who art in heaven," &c.
