Twenty-Third Sunday After Pentecost
Should there be but 23 Sundays after Pentecost, the Mass of the 24th is said to-day, and this on the preceding Saturday, (if it be neither a double nor semi-double,) in which case it is said on some vacant day before it.
Epistle.	Philippians iii. 17, 21; iv. 1, 3.	Brethren: Be followers of me, and observe them who walk so as you have our model. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, (and now tell you weeping,) that they are enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame: who mind earthly things. But our conversation is in heaven: from whence also we look for the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of his glory, according to the operation whereby also he is able to subdue all things unto himself. (Chap, iv.) Therefore my dearly beloved brethren, and most desired, my joy, and my crown: so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. I beg of Evodia, and I beseech Syntyche, to be of one mind in the Lord. And I entreat thee also, my sincere companion, help those women that have laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement and the rest of my fellow labourers, whose names are in the book of life.
Gospel.	Matthew ix. 18, 26.	At that time: As Jesus was speaking to the multitude, behold a certain ruler came up and adored him, saying: Lord, my daughter is even now dead; but come, lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus rising up followed him, with his disciples. And behold a woman who was troubled with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him and touched the hem of his garment. For she said within herself: If I shall touch only his garment, I shall be healed. But Jesus turning and seeing her, said: Be of good heart, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour. And when Jesus was come into the house of the ruler, and saw the minstrels and the multitude making a rout, he said: Give place: for the girl is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. And when the multitude was put forth, he went in and took her by the hand. And the maid arose. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that country. Credo.
As there cannot be less than 23, nor more than 28 Sundays after Pentecost, it is to be observed, that the Mass of the 24th is always said on that Sunday which immediately precedes Advent. When, therefore, it happens that there are any intervening Sundays between the 23rd and the last, the Epistles and Gospels are taken from the Sundays which were omitted after Epiphany: for instance, if but one Sunday, the Mass is of the 6th after Epiphany; if two, of the 5th and 6th; if three, of the 4th, 5th, and 6th; and if four, of the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th.
