Of St. Patrick, ap. and Patron of Ireland. — 17th March
Lesson.	Ecclesiastes xliv. xlv.	Behold a great priest, who in his time pleased God, and was found just; and in the time of wrath became an atonement. There were none found like him in observing the law of the Most High. Therefore by an oath did the Lord make him great amongst his people. He gave him the blessing of all nations, and established his covenant on his head. He acknowledged him in his blessings: he stored up his mercy for him; and he found favour in the eyes of the Lord. (Chap, xlv.) He exalted him in the sight of kings; and gave him a crown of glory. He made with him an eternal covenant: and bestowed on him a great priesthood: and rendered him blessed in glory. To perform the priestly office, to sing praises to the name of God; and to offer him precious incense for an odour of sweetness.
Gospel.	Matthew xxv. 14, 23.	At that time: Jesus spoke this parable to his disciples: A man going into a far country, called his servants, and delivered to them his goods. And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to another one, to every one according to his proper ability; and immediately he took his journey. And he that had received the five talents went his way, and traded with the same, and gained other five. And in like manner he that had received the two, gained other two. But he that had received the one, going his way, digged into the earth, and hid his lord's money. But after a long time the lord of those servants came, and reckoned with them. And he that had received the five talents, coming, brought other five talents, saying: Lord, thou didst deliver to me five talents, behold I have gained other five over and above. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant, because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord. And he also that had received the two talents came and said: Lord, thou deliveredst two talents to me: behold I have gained other two. His lord said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant, because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
