The Litany Of The Blessed Virgin · Anthem
We fly to thy patronage, O holy Mother of God! despise not our prayers in our necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, O thou ever glorious and blessed Virgin.
Lord have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord have mercy on us. Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. God the Father of Heaven, Have mercy on us. God the Son, Redeemer of the world, Have mercy on us. God the Holy Ghost, Have mercy on us. Holy Trinity, one God, Have mercy on us. Holy Mary, Pray for us. Holy Mother of God, Pray for us. Holy Virgin of Virgins, Pray for us. Mother^of Christ, Pray for us. Mother of Divine Grace, Pray for us. Most pure Mother, Pray for us. Most chaste Mother, Pray for us. Mother undefiled, Pray for us. Mother unviolated, Pray for us. Most amiable Mother, Pray for us. Most admirable Mother, Pray for us. Mother of our Creator, Pray for us. Mother of our Redeemer, Pray for us. Most prudent Virgin, Pray for us. Most venerable Virgin, Pray for us. Most renowned Virgin, Pray for us. Most powerful Virgin, Pray for us. Most merciful Virgin, Pray for us. Most faithful Virgin, Pray for us. Mirror of Justice, Pray for us. Seat of Wisdom, Pray for us. Cause of our Joy, Pray for us. Spiritual Vessel, Pray for us. Honourable Vessel, Pray for us. Vessel of singular Devotion, Pray for us. Mystical Rose, Pray for us. Tower of David, Pray for us. Tower of Ivory Pray for us. House of Gold, Pray for us. Ark of the Covenant, Pray for us. Gate of Heaven, Pray for us. Morning Star, Pray for us. Health of the Weak, Pray for us. Refuge of Sinners, Pray for us. Comforter of the Afflicted, Pray for us. Help of Christians, Pray for us. Queen of Angels, Pray for us. Queen of Patriarchs, Pray for us. Queen of Prophets, Pray for us. Queen of Apostles, Pray for us. Queen of Martyrs, Pray for us. Queen of Confessors, Pray for us. Queen of Virgins, Pray for us. Queen of All Saints, Pray for us. Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord. Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear us, O Lord, Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us. Christ hear us. Christ graciously hear us. Lord have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord have mercy on us. Our Father, &c. V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God; R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.
