A Prayer After Confirmation
O my God, I now desire to adore thee, bless thee, and glorify thee, for ever, for all thou hast done for me, and for thy whole church, both of heaven and earth. I would now gladly join both my heart and my voice with all thy angels and saints in heaven, and with all that fear thee and love thee on earth, in giving perpetual praise to thee for thy infinite goodness, and in particular for that love thou hast shown to me this day. I give thee thanks from the bottom of my heart, for having sent down the Holy Spirit into my soul, with all his gifts and graces. O let him now take full possession of my soul; let this heavenly unction penetrate into the very centre of my interior; let his divine wisdom ever preside there, may it ever enlighten me with his gifts of understanding, and dispel all my darkness: may it direct me with his counsel, strengthen me with his fortitude, instruct me with his knowledge, make me ever fervent in all good, with his piety and godliness and let his divine fear ever restrain me from evil. And now, dear Lord, since thou hast been pleased, by this sacrament, to consecrate and sanctify my soul for thyself, and to make it thy temple, be pleased also to drive far from it, by thy grace, all that may violate or profane it, or render it any ways disagreeable to thy eyes. O keep it for ever for thyself, and restrain Satan from ever entering into it any more. O let it be a house of prayer, in which thou mayest be ever worshipped, in spirit and in truth, and suffer it not to be made any more a den of thieves. Give me grace also to fulfil, with perfection, every branch of the duty of thy soldier,—which glorious title thou hast conferred on me this day: arm me completely for the warfare in which I am happily engaged, and stand by me in all my conflicts, to crown me with victory. O make me faithful unto death, and bring me safe through all the dangers of my mortal pilgrimage, to the crown of everlasting life: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
N. B.—Here repeat the Hymns, "Creating Spirit, come posses;" and, "Come, Holy Ghost, send down those beams," which are inserted, with the Latin, at the end, under the head of Whit-Sunday.
