Hymn for Easter
O filii et filiæ, Praise by mortals now be given, Rex cœlestis, Rex gloriæ, On this day from death hath risen Morte surrexit hodie, Alleluia. The King of Glory, King of Heaven, Alleluia, Et mane prima Sabbati, The morn of Sabbath scarce did beam, Ad ostium monumenti When to his monument there came Accesserant discipuli, Alleluia. Disciples who ador'd his name, Alleluia. Et Maria Magdalene, There Mary Magdalen anxious stood. Et Jacobi, et Salome, And James, and Salome the good Venerunt corpus ungere, Alleluia. His body fain embalm they would, Alleluia. In albis sedens angelus The angel sat in white all rob'd, Prædixit mulieribus, And to the women he foretold: In Galilea est Dominus, Alleluia. In Galilee you'll see the Lord, Alleluia. Et Joannes apostolus The message scarce did greet his ear, Cucurrit Petro citùs, Swifter than Peter, John drew near Monumento venit priùs, Alleluia. To the Lord's tomb, with hope, with fear, Alleluia. Discipulis astantibus, The disciples all assembled were; In medio stetit Christus, Among them Jesus did appear, Dicens, pax vobis omnibus, Alleluia. His peace he gave, remov'd their fear, Alleluia. Ut intellexit Didymus Thomas believed not, when 'twas said Quia surrexerat Jesus, That Christ had risen from the dead, Remansit fere dubius, Alleluia. Until he saw the wounds that bled, Alleluia. Vide Thoma, vide latus, My hands, my side, my feet, O see! Vide pedes, vide manus: Thomas, wounds that bled for thee: Noli esse incrodulus, Alleluia. Renounce thine incredulity, Alleluia. Quando Thomas vidit Christum When Thomas, Jesus had survey'd, Pedes, manus, latus suum, And on his wounds his fingers laid, Dixit: Tu es Deus meus, Alleluia. Thou art my Lord and God, he said, Alleluia. Beati qui non viderunt, Blessed are they who have not seen, Et firmiter crediderunt, And yet, whose faith entire hath been, Vitam æternam habebunt, Alleluia. Them endless joy from pain shall screen, Alleluia. In hoc festo sanctissimo On this most solemn feast let's raise Sit laus et jubilatio: Our hearts to God in hymns of praise. Benedicamus Domino, Alleluia. And bless the Lord in all his ways, Alleluia, Ex quibus nos humillimas Our grateful thanks to God let's give, Devotas atque debitas In humblest manner, whilst we live, Deo dicamus gratias, Alleluia. For all the favours we receive, Alleluia.
Ye sons and daughters of the Lord! The King of glory, King adored, This day Himself from death restored. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! All in the early morning grey, Went holy women on their way, To see the tomb where Jesus lay. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Of spices pure a precious store, In their pure hands those women bore, To anoint the Sacred Body o'er. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Then straightway One in white they see, Who saith, "Ye seek the Lord; but He Is ris'n, and gone to Galilee." Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! This told they Peter, told they John, Who forthwith to the tomb are gone; But Peter is by John outrun. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! That selfsame night, while out of fear, The doors were shut, their Lord most dear, To His Apostles did appear. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! But Thomas when of this He heard, Was doubtful of his brethren's word; Wherefore again there comes the Lord. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! "Thomas, behold My Side" saith He; "My Hands, My Feet, My Body see, And doubt not, but believe in Me." Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! When Thomas saw that wounded Side, The truth no longer he denied; "Thou art my Lord and God," he cried. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Oh, blest are they who have not seen Their Lord, and yet believe in Him: Eternal life awaiteth them. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Now let us praise the Lord most high, And strive His Name to magnify, On this great day through earth and sky: Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Whose mercy ever runneth o'er, Whom men and Angel Hosts adore, To Him be glory ever more. Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!
