Days Of Abstinence From Flesh Meat
All the Sundays in Lent, except when the use of meat is allowed by the Archbishop or Bishop of the diocese.
All the Fridays throughout the Year.
N. B.—Eggs are forbidden on Fridays, when a fast falls on them; and if a Fasting Day fall on a Sunday, the fast is kept on the Saturday before. If Christmas-day fall on a Friday, neither fast nor abstinence is observed.
N.B.—The Catholic Church commands all her children to be present at the great Eucharistic Sacrifice, which we call the Mass, and to rest from servile work, on Sundays and Holy-days.
Secondly—To abstain from flesh on all the days of fasting and abstinence, and on fasting days to eat but one meal.
Thirdly—To confess their sins at least once a year.
Fourthly—To receive the blessed sacrament at least once a year, and that at Easter, viz., between Palm and Low Sundays.
The time appointed in the Archdioceses of Dublin, for complying with the Easter Duty, begins an Ash-Wednesday, and terminates on Ascension Day. They who, without some reasonable cause, neglect this important duty, are liable to be excommunicated whilst living, and when they die, to be deprived of Christian burial, according to the fourth Council of Lateran, can. 21.
Marriage cannot be contracted by persons within the fourth degree of kindred without a dispensation, and if attempted is invalid. Spiritual kindred, contracted by baptism or confirmation, is an impediment.
Clandestine marriage is that which is not performed by the pastor of one of the party, with certificate, or by another priest, with his license, and in the presence of two or three witnesses.
Clandestine marriages are unlawful, and forbidden by the church; and are null or invalid in all the dioceses of Ireland, as the Decree of the Council of Trent, which annuls clandestine marriages, has duly been received in them all, 2nd December, 1827, and was in force thirty days after, or 1st January, 1828.
The solemnizing of marriage is forbidden from the first Sunday in Advent till after Twelfth-day; and from the beginning of Lent till Easter-Sunday. At all other times it may be solemnized.
