A Preparation For Confession
There is scarcely any duty of greater importance in religion, than to receive the Sacrament of Penance with the necessary dispositions. Penance is as indispensably requisite for those who have fallen into sin after baptism, as baptism itself is for such as have never been baptized. It is a second plank after the shipwreck of sin, without which the sinner must inevitably perish. But then it is to be observed, that this sacrament must be received with the necessary dispositions. The cleansing of the baptismal robe, and restoring it to its original purity, is not to be effected without much labour and application. It would be absurd to imagine, that the unchangeable justice of God, which could not be satisfied but by the sufferings of Jesus Christ, and which, notwithstanding these sufferings, doth still condemn to eternal torments the unrepenting sinner; it would be absurd, I say, to imagine that his justice should now be appeased by a superficial or outward compliance with this duty, accompanied perhaps with insincerity, gross negligence, or a fixed adherence to mortal sin, and therefore destitute of real sorrow, change of heart, and a firm purpose of amendment. The enormity of sin is the same at this day as it ever was; it is as unchangeable as God himself; because it is essentially a rebellion against him; a breach of his law, an insult offered to his eternal Majesty, and consequently not more remissable at present in the sacrament of penance, than at the earliest period of Christianity, when the severest discipline prevailed, and when the fervour of primitive penitents was so ardent.—Hence, that this merciful institution may never be frustrated of its end, and in order that the sinner may always receive the pardon of his offences, we must strictly fulfil these five following conditions:	I. An examination of conscience, that we may know all our sins.	II. A heart-felt sorrow for having committed them.	III. A firm resolution never to commit them again.	IV. A candid and humble confession of them to a priest empowered to absolve us.	V. A desire or intention of satisfying God, and our neighbour also, if injured.
