Prayers · Before The Examination Of Conscience
Beg of God to make your sins known to you, and to give you a true sense of their malice. Prostrate yourself in spirit at the feet of your Redeemer, as Magdalen did when she washed them with her tears; or imagine yourself on Mount Calvary, and there, beneath his cross, pour forth your prayers to him, resolving to acquit yourself of this confession, as if it were to be your last.
O holy Spirit, eternal Source of Light, mercifully vouchsafe to enlighten the darkness of my understanding, that I may clearly perceive the true state of my conscience. Thou who hast created me, and art to be my judge, dost fully behold the most secret recesses of my heart; show me now, therefore, my sins, in as conspicuous a manner as I shall behold them when on the point of appearing at thy tremendous tribunal. My object at present is, to prevent the rigorous account I must there give of all my thoughts, words, and actions; for were I now deficient in that sincere exactness which is necessary in the examination and confession of my sins, thou wouldst infallibly correct, at thy unerring tribunal, the injustice and iniquity of such a proceeding. Discover, then, to me, O my God, all these secret thoughts, irregular desires, criminal words, and actions, or omissions of my duty, by which I may have violated thy sacred laws, or scandalized my neighbour. O do not permit self-love to seduce and blind me, but rather remove the veil it places before my eyes, that beholding the true state of my interior, I may make an humble and sincere confession of my sins to thy minister.
I desire, like the prodigal child, to enter seriously into myself, and without delay to forsake my evil ways, in which I have been wearied out in the pursuit of empty toys and mere shadows, seeking in vain to satisfy my thirst with muddy waters, and my hunger with the husks of swine. I ardently desire to return to thee, O Fountain of Life! but, O my God, though I can go astray from thee fast enough, when left to myself, yet I cannot make one step towards returning to thee, unless thy divine grace stir me up and assist me. This grace, then, I most humbly implore, prostrate in spirit before the throne of thy mercy. I beg it for the sake of Jesus Christ, my Redeemer, who died upon the cross for me and for all sinners. Thou hast said, "There is joy in heaven for one sinner that doeth penance." Give me now the grace of true repentance, and let heaven rejoice at my conversion. Assist me in this great work by thy heavenly light, in order that I may discover all my imperfections, see all my sins in their true colours, and sincerely detest and confess them. I know thou desirest not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted and live. I know that thy mercies are above all thy works, and I most confidently hope, that as in thy mercy thou hast spared me so long, and hast now given me this desire of returning to thee, so thou wilt finish the work that thou hast begun, by assisting me in every part of my preparation for it, and bringing me to a perfect reconciliation with thee.
Examine yourself attentively, not only on the sins you have committed since your last confession, but also on the faults you may have committed in making it; but beware of scrupulosity or anxiety; for in this examination it is only necessary that you should use such a moral diligence as any temporal concern might require, where it is neither your intention nor your interest to be deceived. For this purpose, calmly recollect on the different occasions of sin which have since fallen in your way, or to which your state and condition of life exposes you; the places you have frequented, the persons you nave conversed with; &c. &c.; in the doing of which the following table of sins will greatly assist you.
