Sins Against God
In Matters of Faith.
Have you been guilty of heresy, or disbelief of any article of faith, or of voluntarily doubting of any article of faith?	Have you rashly exposed yourself to the danger of infidelity, by reading bad books, keeping wicked company, going into places of worship belonging to other communions during the time of their service, and joining with them in their worship?	Have you, by word or deed, denied your faith, or railed at or despised holy things?	Have you been ignorant of the articles of your faith and the duties of your religion, or have you been negligent in instructing, or procuring the necessary instructions for those under your care?	Have you given credit to dreams, taken notice of omens, or made any other superstitious observations?	Have you used charms or spells, or consulted fortune-tellers, or made use of any other superstitious practices to find out things to come, recover things lost, &c. How often? and with what scandal and ill example to others?
Of Hope.
Have you despaired of salvation, or of the forgiveness of your sins?	Have you rashly presumed upon God's goodness, continuing to offend him because he is merciful; going on in your sins, without any thought of amendment, depending upon a death-bed repentance?	Have you relied upon yourself rather than upon divine grace; or neglected for a long time to return to God by repentance, after falling into mortal sin?
Of Charity.
Have you loved any creature as much or more than God?	Have you murmured against the providence of God, resisted his inspirations, refused to submit to his divine will, not prevented evil when you could and ought, committed sins through human respect?
Of Religion.
Have you made a sacrilegious confession or communion?	Have you received the sacraments of confirmation or matrimony in the state of mortal sin?	Have you abused the holy scripture, or profaned holy places or sacred things?	Have you blasphemed God or his saints?	Have you been negligent in the divine worship, seldom or never adoring and praising God, or giving him thanks for his benefits?	Have you prayed but seldom, or with little attention, or omitted to make acts of faith, hope, and charity?	Have you behaved with irreverence in the house of God, or broken any vow or solemn promise made to him?	Have you neglected to hear mass on Sundays and holy-days of obligation? or have you heard it with wilful distractions, or not taken care that your children or servants should hear it?	Have you neglected confession and communion at Easter, or omitted the penance enjoined you, or acquitted yourself of these religious duties carelessly?	Have you sworn falsely, or what you did not certainly know whether it was true or false?	Have you broken your lawful oaths, or sworn to do any thing that was wicked or unlawful?	Have you had a custom of swearing rashly or inconsiderately, by the name of God, by your soul, or by the way of imprecation upon yourself or others?	Have you sworn by the blood or wounds of God, or any other blasphemous oath, or been accessory to others swearing, cursing, or blaspheming?	Have you spent the Sundays or holy-days of obligation in idleness or sin, or been the occasion of others so spending them?	Have you done any servile work without necessity upon those days?	Have you broken the days of abstinence, or eaten more than one meal on fasting days, or been accessory to others so doing? How often, &c.
