An Act Of Adoration
The Gospel of St Luke, chap, xxii., informs us, that our Saviour sat down, and his twelve apostles with him, to eat the Paschal Lamb, or accomplish the Supper of the Old Law, and institute that of the New in its stead. Who could be otherwise than astonished at seeing a God admit his creatures, nay, even his very enemies, to partake of his adorable body? "When he loved his own who were in the world," says his beloved disciple, St. John, "he loved them unto the end." But this was loving them, not merely to the end of this mortal life, but even beyond it, to the very end of ages with the utmost excess, and to the farthest limits of love. Contemplate, therefore, with the most attentive recollection, the excellence, the depth, and the extent of the boundless love of our divine Redeemer, of which this mystery is an epitome.
Could we ever believe, O Lord, or even imagine, that thy love for us was so excessive, had not thine own infallible word convinced us of its truth? Hadst thou, when thou wert about to quit this world, left us thy adorable heart as a pledge of thy affection; or hadst thou, when thy side was pierced, ordered thy precious blood to be distributed throughout thy church; such favours would have justly claimed our most grateful acknowledgments. But this would not satisfy the extent of thy love; thou didst choose, in a god-like manner, to penetrate into the very centre of our hearts, and give thyself to each of us particularly, entirely, and for ever. With what amazement, then, must not the angels and the whole hierarchy of celestial intelligences, have beheld such a prodigy! Were they not in some measure jealous to see mankind thus uncommonly favoured? But what didst thou discover in me, O Lord, that could thus attract thee? Or what couldst thou possibly expect from my indigence? Can I become the dwelling-place of him who is the delight of the blessed? Alas! had I even the innocence of thy beloved disciple John, or the ardent love of thy zealous apostle St Peter, I should then have some little claim to sit down at thy table; but since I am removed at so great a distance from such holy dispositions, vouchsafe, O Lord, to supply my deficiency by the effusion of thy grace. Whence is this favour to me, O my merciful Redeemer? "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou shouldst visit him?" Psalm viii.
