An Act Of Contrition
By our Saviour's washing the feet of his disciples, to prepare them for this new supper, ("And he began to wash the feet of his disciples, and dry them with the girt he had about him,"—John, xiii.) we are taught not to confine ourselves merely to detesting those grievous sins which give death to the soul; because we see that the disciples were obliged to undergo this ceremony, though Christ already had declared them pure, and in the state of grace; ("you," saith he, "are already clean;") but we should also endeavour to purify our souls, as much as possible, from even the slightest stains of venial sin, which is signified by the washing of the feet of his disciples.
To transform a soul, so defiled as mine by the ordure of sin, into a state of innocence and purity, must be the work of the right hand of the Most High. Ah, my God! I shall never be able to discover any vestige of that precious innocence which makes a soul so lovely and acceptable in thy sight, unless I trace back my whole life to the days of my childhood. But although I have had the misfortune to forfeit my baptismal innocence by sin, yet there remains for my consolation this sure anchor, whereby I may hope to regain thy favour, grounded on thy infallible promise, that thou wilt never despise a contrite and humble heart.
But if even the enormity of my sins had not exposed me to thy wrath, and consequently to the eternal pains of hell, yet I would nevertheless sincerely detest them. O my God! do not upbraid me with mine iniquities; they are always in my sight; and the bitterness of my regret for having committed them, shall serve as a continual punishment of my baseness. Ah, my Redeemer, though I cannot suffer such an excessive degree of anguish as thou didst during thy agony in the garden of Gethsemani, when in a bloody sweat thou didst offer thyself as a victim to the Eternal Father, yet I am fully determined to suffer with patience every cross or affliction which may fall in my way, as well in atonement for the sins I have hitherto committed, as to prevent me from future relapses. Assist me with thy grace, O Lord, and remove every occasion of sin at a distance from me: and as I dread no evil so much as that of offending thee mortally, rather prevent me, by cutting the thread of life, than suffer me again to become thine enemy. But in my present disposition of mind, I do not confine myself to merely detesting all mortal offences! No, my amiable Saviour! inflamed with thy love, I am also fully resolved to avoid every venial sin that may in the least displease thee, or diminish the influence of thy graces. And though I have a well-grounded confidence that my soul has been cleansed in the sacrament of penance, still I desire to be washed more and more from my iniquities. "Create a clean heart in me, O God; and renew an upright spirit within my bowels."—Psalm L.
