A Prayer
For Obtaining The Effects Of A Plenary Indulgence.
Accept, O almighty God, through the merits of thine only Son Jesus Christ, the intercession of his immaculate Mother the blessed Virgin Mary, and of the whole court of heaven, the communion I am about to make, to thy greater glory. Accept it in thanksgiving for thy innumerable benefits, to obtain the pardon of my sins, and grace to acquire a victory over my passions, particularly those to which I am most enslaved. [Name them.]
Considering that the debts which I owe to thy justice are so immense, that of myself I have not the means of discharging them, I have recourse to the inexhaustible treasure of the merits of my Redeemer, which thy church (in virtue of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which he has committed to its supreme pastors, in the person of St. Peter,) now holds forth to me. Grant me, O Lord, the dispositions to obtain such a portion thereof, as may be necessary to discharge the debt of temporal punishment due to my sins. Suffer me now to partake of the infinite merits of Christ, that the immense ransom which he has paid for my salvation being applied to my poor sinful soul, I may be released from the punishments which it has otherwise so justly deserved. I beseech thee also, O most bountiful Lord! to pour down thy blessings on thy holy Catholic Church; on its supreme pastor, [Pope N. N.]; on the pastor to whom the care of thy flock in this archdioceses or diocese is committed [name him]; upon our queen, and all the royal family; upon all thy bishops and clergy throughout the whole world. Enlighten poor infidels, heretics, and sinners; and assist such apostolic missionaries as labour in their conversion. Unite all mankind in the profession of the true faith; give them the spirit of divine charity, whereby they may love thee above all things, and for thy sake love each other. Have compassion on the suffering souls of the faithful departed. Give thy blessing to my parents, friends, relations, and benefactors; preserve them from eternal misery; and conduct us all, by thy grace, to the mansions of celestial bliss, there to praise and glorify thee for ever. Amen.
