An Act Of Faith
In consequence of the words pronounced by our Saviour when he consecrated the bread and wine, "This is my body," &c; "this is my blood," &c; the apostles received what Christ then gave them as his real body and blood. Do thou now, in like manner, make a most lively Act of Faith of the real presence of Jesus Christ in the blessed Eucharist.
Since thou, omnipotent God, whose almighty words are creative, productive, and effective; since thou, O eternal Truth, who canst neither deceive nor be deceived; since thou, I say, hast declared that thou art really and actually present under the appearance of material bread, I therefore implicitly believe it; for what greater proof can I require of the truth of this mystery, than thine own infallible word? Yes, my dear Saviour, I openly confess, and am inwardly convinced, that it is thou thyself I am going to receive; thou who for my sake wast born in a manger; thou who for my redemption didst die on a cross, and who, though now gloriously seated on thy heavenly throne, still continuest on earth, under the sacramental veils, to feed and nourish the souls of men. Were I to behold thee with my corporal eyes, and examine the impression of the wounds thou didst receive in thy sacred hands and sides, as St. Thomas did, still I could not say with more confidence than I now do, that thou art my Lord and my God! I do not demand a miracle as a proof of thy real presence; no, Lord, let me rather have the whole merit of faith; for thou hast said, "Blessed are those who believe and do not see."
Wert thou therefore to speak to me from this very tabernacle, the voice would affect me less than that which resounds in thy gospel and thy church, founded by thyself, and propagated in a miraculous manner. Though my senses may tell me it is nothing but mere bread; yet, submitting them entirely in obedience to divine faith, I answer it is thy real body and blood, accompanied by thy soul and divinity. In this faith I am determined to live and die; and were I to suffer a thousand martyrdoms in testimony thereof, I am persuaded, that by the help of thy grace I would remain immovable. "Thou art really a hidden God—a God Saviour."— Isaias. "I believe; O Lord, help my unbelief."—Mark, ix.
When about to communicate, let your heart be penetrated with a lively sense of the actual presence of your divine Saviour, and at the same time endeavour to recollect the different passages of Scripture above quoted, they being, as it were, an abridgment of the foregoing acts. You may also reflect on the words, "May the body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy soul into life everlasting," which the priest pronounces at the moment he gives you the blessed sacrament; because they imply, that the end proposed in communicating, is not simply to abide in a certain regularity of conduct for a few months, weeks, or days; but to persevere faithfully, to the very hour of death, in that state of grace to which a worthy participation of this divine sacrament shall now raise you.
