Another Prayer After Communion;
Or When It Has Been Received By The Sick As A Viaticum.
O my gracious Saviour! what greater happiness or comfort could I expect! O wonderful condescension of my God! O what return shall I make him for his ineffable love! He whom the saints, the angels, and the whole heavenly host adore, hath given himself entirely to me, and now really and substantially dwelleth within me! Without any other inducement but his pure mercy, he hath vouchsafed to visit, comfort, and nourish my poor soul with the divine and heavenly banquet of his precious body and blood, with which he redeemed me on the cross. May honour, praise, and glory be for ever paid thee, O my sweet Redeemer Jesus Christ! O that I could now give thee as much honour and glory as is incessantly given thee by the whole choir of heaven! Accept, O Lord, my heart, as a thanksgiving-offering for all thy favours and blessings. Accept my whole being, for by every claim of right and justice it belongeth entirely to thee.
And thou, O my soul, bless the Lord, and let all that is within thee praise his holy name. O all ye works of the Lord, bless the Lord, praise and glorify him for ever. O all ye angels of the Lord, bless the Lord; magnify, praise, and glorify his holy name, because I have found the beloved of my soul. Prostrate at his feet, like the penitent Magdalen, I will embrace him in spirit, and clasp him with the arms of inflamed love. And now, as I have actually received him on earth, may I not confidently hope for the perfect possession of him in heaven? I can now fear no evil, because thou, O Lord, art with me, as my powerful guardian and protector! Give me therefore thy blessing, O beloved Jesus! and establish an everlasting peace in my soul. Thou art the God of my heart, my portion and inheritance for ever. Let nothing in the future be my comfort but thou, my Lord Jesus; nor let any thing afflict me hereafter but my sins, and whatever is displeasing to thy divine Majesty. O soul of Christ, sanctify me; body of Christ, save me; blood of Christ, purify me; water issuing from the side of Christ, wash me; passion of Christ, strengthen me. O good Jesus, graciously hear me, hide me within thy wounds, suffer me never to be separated from thee; call me at the hour of death, and command me to come to thee, that I may associate with the saints and angels, and the whole choir of celestial spirits, to sing forth canticles of praise and glory to thy holy name for ever and ever, world without end. Amen, Amen, Amen, sweet Jesus!
