The Rich Young Man. — (Homilies on St. Matthew, lxiii., vol. ii., p. 227.)
And behold one came and said to Him: Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? Some reject this young man as insidious and bad. I, however, would not deny that he was a lover of money, and unable to resist it, since Christ convicted him of this; but I should not admit that he was insidious, because it is not safe to make a venture upon what is unknown, especially in accusations, and because St. Mark has removed this doubt. For he says that running up and kneeling before Him, he asked Him a question, and again, that Jesus, looking upon him, loved him. But great is the tyranny of money as we gather from this; for even if we be quite faultless as to other things, it alone spoils everything else. St. Paul too justly called it the root of all evils. The love of money, he says, is the root of all evils. Now, why did Our Lord answer him by saying, No man is good. Because the youth approached Him as a mere man, as one of many, and a Jewish teacher: on this account Our Lord spoke as man to man with him. For He frequently answers according to the 42 secret mind of those who come to Him, as, for instance, when He says, We adore what we know, and, If I bear witness to Myself, My witness is not true. When, then, He says, No man is good, He does not say it to repudiate His own goodness—far from it; for He does not say, ‘Why do you call Me good? I am not good,’ but, No man is good, that is, no man at all.
When He speaks in this way, He is not defrauding men of all goodness, but making a distinction as to God’s goodness. So He added: Only God is good. And He did not say, ‘Only my Father,’ that you may know that He did not disclose Himself to the youth. Thus, higher up, He called all men bad, saying, But if you who are bad know how to give good gifts to your children. And if He called them wicked in this place, He did not condemn human nature as altogether bad (for He says you, not ‘you, the human race’). He so called them, because He was putting the goodness of man by the side of the goodness of God, and therefore He added, How much more will your Father give good gifts to those who ask Him. And, you may say, what necessity or advantage was there that He should answer the young man in this way? He leads him up by degrees, teaches him to put off all deception, withdraws him from the things of earth, nailing him to God, inducing him to seek the things to come, to know the good, the root and foundation of all things, and to refer honour back to Him. And thus when He says, You shall call no man master upon earth, He 43 said it to make a distinction as to Himself, that they might learn Who was the first Beginning of all things. For, so far, the young man had shown no slight willingness by rushing eagerly to embrace this love; and whilst others had come, some to tempt, others for the curing of disease, whether it was their own or their neighbours’, he had come and had spoken for the sake of eternal life. The soil indeed was rich and moist, but the brambles overpowered and stifled the seed. For consider how far up to this point he is disposed to obey commands. What shall I do, he says, that I may inherit eternal life? Thus ready was he to accomplish what he should be told. But if he had come to Our Lord to tempt Him, the Evangelist would have told us so, as he does in other instances, and in that of the advocate. But if the young man was silent, Christ would not have allowed him to escape unknown, but would have convicted him wisely, or have hinted at his meaning, so that the youth should not think he had deceived and escaped without recognition, and so have been misled. If he had come to tempt, he would not have gone away sad, because of what he heard. This, at least, was not what any one of the Pharisees of the day did; but when they were silenced, they were angry. It was not so with the young man: he went away cast-down, which was no small proof that he had come with a weak rather than a bad intention, with the desire of life, but weighed down by another and a stronger passion.
44
Therefore, when Our Lord said, If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments, he asks, Which commandments? This was not said tempting—far from it—but thinking that he was to know of other commandments besides those of the Law, which would help him to life. This showed a great desire on his part. Then, when Jesus enumerated those of the Law, he said, All these have I kept from my youth. And he did not stop his enquiry here, but asked further, What is yet wanting to me? which in itself was a proof of his eagerness. His thinking himself to be still wanting in something, and his deeming that the things already specified were not sufficient, was no small step towards gaining what he desired. What does Christ say? As He was about to accomplish a great work, He put the prize before the youth and said, If thou wouldst be perfect, go, sell what thou hast and give to the poor, and thou shalt have a treasure in heaven, and come and follow Me. Do you see what rewards and crowns He sets for this career? If the young man had been tempting, he would not have spoken these things to Him. But now He does speak, and, as it were, draws him to Himself, shows him the reward to be exceedingly great, and unfolds the whole before his mind, hiding throughout the semblance of irksomeness in the advice. Therefore, before speaking of the combat and the labour, He shows him the reward, saying, If thou wilt be perfect; then He adds, Go, sell what thou hast and give to the poor, and, again returning to 45 the rewards, thou shalt have a treasure in heaven, and come and follow Me. For the following Him is a great compensation. And thou shalt have a treasure in heaven. Hence, as the matter turned on money, and He was exhorting the young man to strip himself of everything, He points out that He does not take away possessions, but adds to them, and that He gives more things than those of which He commanded the sacrifice; and not merely are they more, but they are as much greater as heaven is than earth, and even more. He spoke of a treasure which is double the thing given, showing it to be abiding and secure, intimating thus through human things what His listener was to understand. Indeed, it is not enough to despise money, but a man must also feed the poor and follow Christ above all things; that is, he must carry out all His commandments, hold himself in readiness to be slaughtered and to suffer death any day. If any man wish to come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me. As this command was a much higher one than the giving up of money—even the shedding of blood—so the giving up of money is no slight help towards its fulfilment. And when the young man had heard this word, he went away sad. Then, as if to show that he had felt nothing unreasonable, the Evangelist said, for he was very rich. Those who possess a little and those who are steeped in abundance are not equally restrained; then it is that love becomes more tyrannical. So I 46 will not cease to say that the addition of superfluities is fuel to the fire, that it makes their possessors poorer, that it increases, indeed, their desires, and makes them conscious of greater needs. See how, in this case, passion showed its strength. For when Our Lord commanded the man, who came to him with joyful readiness, to renounce his money, he was so cast down and perturbed as to go away without giving any answer at all; and having become silent and sad and gloomy, he thus departed.
· · · · · · ·
