Lesson 14: On Baptism
? 152. What is Baptism?
Baptism is a Sacrament which cleanses us from original sin, makes us Christians, children of God, and heirs of heaven.
? 153. Are actual sins ever remitted by Baptism?
Actual sins and all the punishment due to them are remitted by Baptism, if the person baptized be guilty of any.
? 154. Is Baptism necessary to salvation?
Baptism is necessary to salvation, because without it we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.
? 155. Who can administer Baptism?
The priest is the ordinary minister of Baptism; but in case of necessity any one who has the use of reason may baptize.
? 156. How is Baptism given?
Whoever baptizes should pour water on the head of the person to be baptized, and say, while pouring the water: I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
? 157. How many kinds of Baptism are there?
There are three kinds of Baptism: Baptism of water, of desire, and of blood.
? 158. What is Baptism of water?
Baptism of water is that which is given by pouring water on the head of the person to be baptized, and saying at the same time: I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
? 159. What is Baptism of desire?
Baptism of desire is an ardent wish to receive Baptism, and to do all that God has ordained for our salvation.
? 160. What is Baptism of blood?
Baptism of blood is the shedding of one's blood for the faith of Christ.
? 161. Is Baptism of desire or of blood sufficient to produce the effects of Baptism of water?
Baptism of desire or of blood is sufficient to produce the effects of the Baptism of water, if it is impossible to receive the Baptism of water.
? 162. What do we promise in Baptism?
In Baptism we promise to renounce the devil with all his works and pomps.
? 163. Why is the name of a saint given in Baptism?
The name of a saint is given in Baptism in order that the person baptized may imitate his virtues and have him for a protector.
? 164. Why are godfathers and godmothers given in Baptism?
Godfathers and godmothers are given in Baptism in order that they may promise, in the name of the child, what the child itself would promise if it had the use of reason.
? 165. What is the obligation of a godfather and a godmother?
The obligation of a godfather and a godmother is to instruct the child in its religious duties, if the parents neglect to do so or die.
