Lesson 16: On the Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Ghost
? 176. Which are the effects of Confirmation?
The effects of Confirmation are an increase of sanctifying grace, the strengthening of our faith, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
? 177. Which are the gifts of the Holy Ghost?
The gifts of the Holy Ghost are Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety and Fear of the Lord.
? 178. Why do we receive the gift of Fear of the Lord?
We receive the gift of Fear of the Lord to fill us with a dread of sin.
? 179. Why do we receive the gift of Piety?
We receive the gift of Piety to make us love God as a Father and obey Him because we love Him.
? 180. Why do we receive the gift of Knowledge?
We receive the gift of Knowledge to enable us to discover the will of God in all things.
? 181. Why do we receive the gift of Fortitude?
We receive the gift of Fortitude to strengthen us to do the will of God in all things.
? 182. Why do we receive the gift of Counsel?
We receive the gift of Counsel to warn us of the deceits of the devil, and of the dangers to salvation.
? 183. Why do we receive the gift of Understanding?
We receive the gift of Understanding to enable us to know more clearly the mysteries of faith.
? 184. Why do we receive the gift of Wisdom?
We receive the gift of Wisdom to give us a relish for the things of God, and to direct our whole life and all our actions to His honor and glory.
? 185. Which are the Beatitudes?
The Beatitudes are:
1. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 2. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land. 3. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. 4. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall be filled. 5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 6. Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. 7. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. 8. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
? 186. Which are the twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost?
The twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost are Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Long-suffering, Mildness, Faith, Modesty, Continency, and Chastity.
