Hymns
Come, Holy Ghost, Creator Blest
1. Come, Holy Ghost, Creator blest,	And in our hearts take up Thy rest;	Come with Thy grace and heavenly aid	|| To fill the hearts which Thou hast made. ||
2. O Comforter, to Thee we cry,	Thou heavenly Gift of God most high,	Thou Fount of life and Fire of love,	|| And sweet Anointing from above. ||
3. Praise we the Father and the Son,	And Holy Spirit with them One;	And may the Son on us bestow	|| The gifts that from the Spirit flow. ||
O Salutaris
1. O Salutaris Hostia!	Quae coeli pandis ostium:	Bella premunt hostilia,	Da robur, fer auxilium.
2. Uni trinoque Domino	Sit sempiterna gloria,	Qui vitam sine termino	Nobis donet in Patria. Amen.
Tantum Ergo
1. Tantum ergo Sacramentum	Veneremur cernui;	Et antiquum documentum	Novo cedat ritui;	Praestet fides supplementum	Sensuum defectui.
2. Genitori, Genitoque	Laus et jubilatio,	Salus, honor, virtus quoque	Sit et benedictio;	Procedenti ab utroque	Compar sit laudatio. Amen.
V. Panem de coelo praestitisti eis,	R. Omne delectamentum in se habentem.
Adeste Fideles
1. Adeste, fideles,	Laeti triumphantes;	Venite, venite in Bethlehem;	Natum videte	Regem Angelorum,	Venite, adoremus,	Venite, adoremus,	Venite, adoremus Dominum.
2. Deum de Deo,	Lumen de lumine,	Gestant puellae viscera;	Deum verum,	Genitum non factum,	Venite, etc.
3. Cantet nunc Io!	Chorus Angelorum;	Cantet nunc aula coelestium.	Gloria	In excelsis Deo,	Venite, etc.
4. Ergo, qui natus	Die hodierna,	Jesu! tibi sit gloria,	Patris aeterni	Verbum caro factum,	Venite, etc.
Jesus, My Lord, My God	(REV. F. W. FABER)
1. Jesus, my Lord, my God, my all!	How can I love Thee as I ought?	And how revere this wondrous gift,	So far surpassing hope or thought?
CHORUS.—Sweet Sacrament! we Thee adore,	Oh, make us love Thee more and more,	Oh, make us love Thee more and more.
2. Had I but Mary's sinless heart	To love Thee with, my dearest King,	Oh, with what bursts of fervent praise	Thy goodness, Jesus, would I sing!
To Jesus' Heart All Burning	(REV. A. J. CHRISTIE, S.J.)
1. To Jesus' Heart, all burning	With fervent love for men,	My heart with fondest yearning	Shall raise the joyful strain.
CHORUS.—While ages course along,	Blest be with loudest song	|| The Sacred Heart of Jesus	By every heart and tongued. ||
2. O Heart for me on fire	With love no man can speak,	My yet untold desire	God gives me for Thy sake.
3. Too true I have forsaken	Thy flock by wilful sin;	Yet now let me be taken	Back to Thy fold again.
Jesus, Gentlest Saviour	(REV. F. W. FABER)
1. Jesus, gentlest Saviour!	God of might and power;	Thou Thyself art dwelling	In us at this hour.	Nature cannot hold Thee,	Heav'n is all too strait	For Thine endless glory,	And Thy royal state.
2. Out beyond the shining	Of the farthest star,	Thou art ever stretching	Infinitely far.	Yet the hearts of children	Hold what worlds cannot,	And the God of wonders	Loves the lowly spot.
Jesus! Saviour of My Soul
1. Jesus! Saviour of my soul,	Let me to Thy refuge fly,	While the nearer waters roll,	While the tempest still is nigh.
CHORUS.—Hide me, O my Saviour, hide	Till the storm of life is past;	Safe into Thy haven guide,	O receive my soul at last.	Jesus! Saviour of my soul,	Let me to Thy refuge fly;	Ave, Ave, Jesus mild,	Deign to hear Thy lowly child.
2. Other refuge have I none,	Hangs my helpless soul on Thee,	Leave, oh, leave me not alone,	Still support and strengthen me.
Jesus, the Very Thought of Thee	(REV. E. CASWALL)
1. Jesus, the very thought of Thee	With rapture fills my breast;	But sweeter far Thy Face to see,	And in Thy presence rest.
2. Nor voice can sing, nor heart can frame,	Nor can the mem'ry find	A sweeter sound than Thy blest Name,	O Saviour of mankind!
3. Jesus, our only joy be Thou,	As Thou our prize wilt be;	O Jesus, be our glory now	And through eternity.
What Happiness Can Equal Mine?	(REV. F. W. FABER)
1. What happiness can equal mine?	I've found the object of my love:	My Jesus dear, my King Divine,	Is come to me from heav'n above;	He chose my heart for His abode,	He there becomes my daily bread;	There on me flows His healing blood;	There with His flesh my soul is fed.
CHORUS.—What happiness can equal mine?	I've found the object of my love:	My Jesus dear, my King Divine,	Is come to me from heav'n above.
2. I am my love's, and He is mine:	In me He dwells, in Him I live;	What greater treasures could I find?	And could, ye heavens, a greater give?	O sacred banquet, heav'nly feast!	O overflowing source of grace,	Where God the food, and man, the guest,	Meet and unite in sweet embrace!
The Love of Jesus
1. O the priceless love of Jesus:	O the strength of grace divine;	All His gifts are showered upon me,	All His blessings may be mine.	He is throned in Heavenly glory	Where no sin nor death can be;	Yet He loves me in this darkness,	Yet He does not turn from me.
2. I am blind, and poor, and wretched,	By temptations sorely tried;	Yet His watchful care abounding	Keeps me ever at His side.	He is God and King Eternal,	Higher than all height can be;	Yet His Heart is with me always,	Yet He stoopeth down to me.
Holy God, We Praise Thy Name	(REV. C. WALWORTH)
1. Holy God, we praise Thy name,	Lord of all, we bow before Thee!	All on earth Thy sceptre claim,	All in heav'n above adore Thee.	|| Infinite Thy vast domain,	Everlasting is Thy name. ||
2. Hark! the loud celestial hymn,	Angel choirs above are raising!	Cherubim and Seraphim,	In unceasing chorus praising.	|| Fill the heavens with sweet accord;	Holy! Holy! Holy Lord. ||
Hail, Heavenly Queen!
1. Hail, heavenly Queen! Hail, foamy ocean star!	O be our guide, diffuse thy beams afar;	Hail, Mother of God! above all virgins blest,	Hail, happy gate of heav'n's eternal rest.
CHORUS.—Hail foamy ocean star! Hail, heav'nly Queen!	|| O be our guide to endless joys unseen. ||
2. "Hail, full of grace," with Gabriel we repeat;	Thee, Queen of heav'n, from him we learn to greet;	Then give us peace which heav'n alone can give,	And dead thro' Eve, thro' Mary let us live.
Mother Dear, Oh, Pray for Me
1. Mother dear, oh, pray for me,	Whilst far from heav'n and thee	I wander in a fragile bark,	O'er life's tempestuous sea;	O Virgin Mother, from thy throne,	So bright in bliss above,	Protect thy child and cheer my path,	With thy sweet smile of love.
CHORUS.—Mother dear, remember me,	And never cease thy care,	Till in heaven eternally	Thy love and bliss I share.
2. Mother dear, oh, pray for me,	Should pleasure's siren lay	E'er tempt thy child to wander far	From virtue's path away;	When thorns beset life's devious way,	And darkling waters flow,	Then, Mary, aid thy weeping child,	Thyself a mother show.
Ora Pro Me
1. Ave Maria! bright and pure,	Hear, O hear me when I pray,	Pains and pleasures try the pilgrim	On his long and dreary way.	Fears and perils are around me,	Ave Maria! bright and pure,	Ore pro me, ora pro me.
2. Ave Maria! Queen of Heaven,	Teach, O teach me to obey,	Lead me on, tho' fierce temptations	Stand and meet me in the way.	When I fail and faint, my Mother,	Ave Maria! bright and pure,	Ora pro me, ora pro me.
I'll Sing a Hymn to Mary	(REV. FR. WYSE)
I'll sing a hymn to Mary,	The Mother of my God,	The Virgin of all Virgins,	Of David's royal blood.	Oh, teach me, holy Mary	A loving song to frame,	When wicked men blaspheme thee	To love and bless thy name.
When troubles dark afflict me	In sorrow and in care,	Thy light doth ever guide me	O beauteous Morning Star.	Lo, I'll be ever ready	Thy goodly help to claim,	When wicked men blaspheme thee	I'll love and bless thy name.
Daily, Daily Sing to Mary
1. Daily, daily sing to Mary	Sing, my soul, her praises due;	All her feasts, her actions worship,	With the heart's devotion true.	Lost in wond'ring contemplation,	Be her majesty confess'd;	Call her Mother, call her Virgin,	Happy Mother, Virgin blest.
2. She is mighty to deliver;	Call her, trust her lovingly;	When the tempest rages round thee,	She will calm the troubled sea.	Gifts of heaven she has given,	Noble Lady, to our race;	She the Queen who decks her subject,	With the light of God's own grace.
Hymn to St. Joseph
1. With grateful hearts we breathe to-day	The tender accents of our love.	We carol forth a little lay	To thee, great saint in heaven above.
CHORUS.—O Joseph dear, from thy bright throne,	Incline thine ear unto our prayer.	And o'er us all as o'er thine own,	Extend thy fond paternal care,	And o'er us all as o'er thine own,	Extend thy fond paternal care,	Extend thy fond paternal care.
2. More favored than earth's greatest king.	Thou wert the guardian of that Child,	Around whose crib full choirs did sing,	With cadenced voices soft and mild.
Dear Guardian of Mary	(REV. F. W. FABER)
1. Dear Guardian of Mary! dear nurse of her child!	Life's ways are full weary, the desert is wild;	Bleak sands are all round us, no home can we see;	Sweet Spouse of our Lady! we lean upon thee.
2. For thou to the pilgrim art father and guide,	And Jesus and Mary felt safe at thy side;	Ah! blessed Saint Joseph, how safe should I be,	Sweet Spouse of our Lady! if thou wert with me.
Dear Angel, Ever at My Side	(REV. F. W. FABER)
1. Dear Angel, ever at my side,	How loving must thou be,	To leave thy home in heaven to guide	A little child like me.
2. Thy beautiful and shining face	I see not, though so near;	The sweetness of thy soft, low voice	I am too deaf to hear.
Hymn at the Communion
O Lord, I am not worthy	That Thou shouldst come to me,	But speak the words of comfort,	My spirit healed shall be.
And humbly I'll receive Thee,	The bridegroom of my soul,	No more by sin to grieve Thee,	Or fly Thy sweet control.
