Ejaculations to the Most Holy Mary
Mother of God, remember me.—St. Francis Xavier.
Virgin and mother, make me always to remember thee.—St. Philip Neri.
Virgin Mary, mother of God, pray to Jesus for me.—The same Saint.
Oh Lady, obtain that Jesus may not cast me from him.—St. Ephrem.
Oh Mary, may my heart never cease to love thee nor my tongue to praise thee.—St. Bonaventure.
Oh Lady, by the love which thou dost bear to Jesus, help me to love him.—St. Bridget.
Oh Mary, deign, to make me thy servant.—Blessed Jane of France.
Oh Mary, I give myself wholly to thee, do thou accept and preserve me.—St. Mary Magdalene of Pazzi.
Oh Lady, do not abandon me until death.—P. Spinelli.
Hail Mary, my mother.—P. Francis Brancaccio.
Holy Mary, my advocate, pray for me.—P. Sortorio Caputi.
How sweet, oh my mother, is thy name of Mary!
It gives me peace, and so much pleasure,
That I wish always to repeat it.
The most holy Mary revealed to a soul devoted to her, that it pleased her much to be honored by her servants with the following devotions.
I thank thee, oh eternal Father, for the power given to Mary thy daughter. Our Father, Hail Mary, Glory be to God.
I thank thee, oh eternal Son, for the wisdom given to Mary thy mother. Our Father, Hail Mary, Glory be to God.
I thank thee, oh eternal Spirit, for the love given to Mary thy spouse. Our Father, Hail Mary, Glory be to God.
To thee we cry, oh queen of mercy, turn towards us, and let us behold thee dispensing favors, bestowing remedies, giving strength. Show us thy compassionate countenance, and we shall be safe.[1930]
Oh mistress of all things, saint of saints, our strength and refuge, God, as it were, of the world, glory of heaven, accept those who love thee; hear us, for thy Son honors thee and denies thee nothing.—Ibid.[1931]
Come, hasten, oh Lady, and aid with thy mercy thy most sinful servant who invokes thee, and deliver him from the hands of the enemy.—Ibid.[1932]
Who will not sigh to thee? With love and grief we sigh. How, then, shall we not sigh to thee, oh solace of the miserable, refuge of outcasts, deliverer of captives? We are secure that if thou dost see our miseries, thy compassion will not be slow to relieve us.—Ibid.[1933]
Oh our Lady and our advocate, recommend us to thy Son. Obtain, oh blessed one, by the grace thou hast merited, that he who did condescend, with thy mediation, to become a participator of our infirmity and misery, may also by thy intercession make us to share in his blessedness and glory.—Ibid.[1934]
In thee I have placed the hope of my whole heart.—St. John Damascene.
It is not possible, oh Lady, that thou shouldst abandon him who places his hope in thee.—St. Bernard.
If thou dost only wish for our salvation, it will be impossible that we should not be saved.—St. Anselm.
Hail, daughter of God the Father; hail, mother of God the Son; hail, spouse of God the Holy Ghost; hail, temple of the whole Trinity.—Simon Garcia.
Oh Virgin, how beautiful art thou!
Mother of my God, my heart is enamored with thy goodness.
Thanks be to God and to Mary.
May all things be to the eternal glory of the most holy Trinity, and of the immaculate Mary.
Live always, Jesus our love and Mary our hope, with Joseph and Theresa our advocates.
