The Sacraments · Baptism (1 of 4)
From what has been hitherto said on the Sacraments in general, we may judge how necessary it is, to a proper understanding of the doctrines of the Christian faith, and to the practice of Christian piety, to know what the Catholic Church proposes to our belief on the Sacraments in particular. That a perfect knowledge of Baptism is particularly necessary to the faithful, an attentive perusal of the epistles of St. Paul, will force upon the mind. The Apostle, not only frequently, but also in language the most energetic, in language full of the Spirit of God, renews the recollection of this mystery, exalts its transcendant dignity, and in it places before us the death, burial, and resurrection of our Lord, as objects of our contemplation and imitation. The pastor, therefore, can never think that he has be stowed sufficient labour and attention on the exposition of this Sacrament. Besides the great festivals of Easter and Pentecost, festivals on which the Church celebrated this Sacrament with the greatest solemnity and devotion, and on which particularly, according to ancient practice, its divine mysteries are to be explained; the pastor should, also, take occasion, at other times, to make it the subject matter of his instructions.
For this purpose, a most convenient opportunity would seem to present itself, whenever the pastor, when about to administer this Sacrament, finds himself surrounded by a considerale number of the faithful: on such occasions, it is true, his exposition cannot embrace every thing that regards baptism; but he can develope one or two points with greater facility, whilst the faithful see them expressed, and contemplate them with devout attention, in the sacred ceremonies which he is performing. Thus each person, reading a lesson of admonition in the person of him who is receiving baptism, calls to mind the promises by which he had bound himself to the service of God when initiated by baptism, and reflects whether his life and morals evince that fidelity to which every one pledges himself, by professing the name of Christian.
To render what we have to say, on this subject, perspicuous, we shall explain the nature and substance of the Sacrament; premising, however, an explication of the word Baptism. The word Baptism, as is well known, is of Greek derivation. Although used in Scripture to express not only that ablution which forms part of the Sacrament, but also every species of ablution, and sometimes, figuratively, to express sufferings; yet it is employed, by ecclesiastical writers, to designate not every sort of ablution, but that which forms part of the Sacrament, and is administered with the prescribed sacramental form. In this sense, the Apostles very frequently make use of the word, in accordance with the institution of Christ.
This Sacrament, the Holy Fathers designate also by other names. St. Augustine informs us that it was sometimes called the Sacrament of Faith; because, by receiving it, we profess our faith in all the doctrines of Christianity: by others it was denominated "Illumination," because by the faith which we profess in baptism, the heart is illumined: " Call to mind," says the Apostle, alluding to the time of baptism, " the former days, wherein being illumined, you endured a great fight of afflictions." St. Chrysostom, in his sermon to the baptized, calls it a purgation, through which "we purge away the old leaven, that we may become a new paste:" he, also, calls it a burial, a planting, and the cross of Jesus Christ: the reasons for all these appellations may be gathered from the epistle of St. Paul to the Romans. St. Denis calls it the beginning of the most holy commandments, for this obvious reason, that baptism is, as it were, the gate through which we enter into the fellowship of Christian life, and begin thenceforward, to obey the commandments. This exposition of the different names of the Sacrament of baptism, the pastor will briefly communicate to the people.
With regard to its definition, although sacred writers give many, to us that which may be collected from the words of our Lord, recorded in the Gospel of St. John, and of the Apostle, in his epistle to the Ephesians, appears the most appropriate: " Unless," says our Lord, a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God;" and, speaking of the Church, the Apostle says: " cleansing it by the laver of water in the word of life." From these words, Baptism may be accurately and appropriately denned: " The Sacrament of regeneration by water in the word." By nature, we are born from Adam, children of wrath; but by baptism we are regenerated in Christ, children of mercy; for, " He gave power to men to be made the sons of God, to them that believe in his name, who are born not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God."
But, define Baptism as we may, the faithful are to be informed that this Sacrament consists of ablution, accompanied, necessarily, according to the institution of our Lord, by certain solemn words. This is the uniform doctrine of the Holy Fathers; a doctrine proved by the authority of St. Augustine: " The word," says he, " is joined to the element, and it becomes a Sacrament." That these are the constituents of Baptism, it be comes more necessary to impress on the minds of the faithful, that they may not fall into the vulgar error of thinking, that the baptismal water, preserved in the sacred font, constitutes the Sacrament. Then only is it to be called the Sacrament of Baptism, when it is really used in the way of ablution, accompanied with the words appointed by our Lord.
But, as we first said, when treating of the Sacraments in general, that every Sacrament consists of matter and form; it is therefore, necessary to point out what constitutes each of these in the Sacrament of Baptism. The matter then, or element of this Sacrament, is any sort of natural water, which is, simply, and without addition of any kind, commonly called water; be it sea-water, river-water, water from a pond, well, or fountain: our Lord has declared that, " Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." The Apostle also says, that the Church was cleansed "by the laver of water;" and in the epistle of St. John, we read these words: " There are three that give testimony on earth; the spirit, and the water, and the blood." The Scripture affords other proofs which establish the same proof. When, however, the baptist says that the Lord will come, " who will baptise in the Holy Ghost, and in fire;" he is not to be under stood to speak of the matter, but of the effect of baptism, produced in the soul by the interior operation of the Holy Ghost; or, if not, of the miracle performed on the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles, in the form of lire, as was foretold by our Lord, in these words; "John, indeed, baptized with water, but you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence."
That water is the matter of Baptism, the Almighty signified both by figures and by prophecies, as we know from holy Scripture: According to the prince of the Apostles, in his first epistle, the deluge which swept the world, because " the wickedness of men was great on the earth, and all the thoughts of their hearts were bent upon evil," was a figure of the waters of Baptism. To omit the cleansing of Naaman the Syrian, and the admirable virtue of the pool of Bethsaida, and many similar types, manifestly symbolic of this mystery; the passage through the Red Sea, according to St. Paul, in his epistle to the Corinthians, was typical of the waters of Baptism. With regard to the oracles of the prophets, the waters to which the prophet Isaias so freely invites all that thirst, and those which Ezekiel saw in spirit, issue from the temple, and also, " the fountain " which Zachary foresaw, " open to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the washing of the sinner and of the unclean woman," were, no doubt, so many types which prefigured the salutary effects of the waters of Baptism.
The propriety of constituting water the matter of baptism, of the nature and efficacy of which it is at once expressive, St. Jerome, in his epistle to Oceanus, proves by many arguments. Upon this subject, however, the pastor will teach, that water, which is always at hand, and within the reach of all, was the fittest matter of a Sacrament which is essentially necessary to all; and, also, that water is best adapted to signify the effect of baptism. It washes away uncleanness, and is, therefore, strikingly illustrative of the virtue and efficacy of baptism, which washes away the stains of sin. We may also add that, like water which cools the body, baptism in a great measure extinguishes the fire of concupiscence in the soul.
But, although, in case of necessity, simple water unmixed Chrism, with any other ingredient, is sufficient for the matter of baptism; yet, when administered in public with solemn ceremonies, the Catholic Church guided by apostolic tradition, the more fully to express its efficacy, has uniformly observed the practice of adding holy chrism. And, although it may be doubted whether this or that water be genuine, such as the Sacrament requires, it can never be matter of doubt that the proper and the only matter of baptism is natural water.
Having carefully explained the matter, which is one of the two parts of which the Sacrament consists, the pastor will evince equal diligence in explaining the second, that is the form, which is equally necessary with the first. In the explication of this Sacrament, a necessity of increased care and study arises, as the pastor will perceive, from the circumstance that the know ledge of so holy a mystery, is not only in itself a source of pleasure to the faithful, as is generally the case with regard to religious knowledge, but, also, very desirable for almost daily practical use. This Sacrament, as we shall explain in its proper place, is frequently administered by the laity, and most frequently, by women; and it, therefore, becomes necessary to make all the faithful indiscriminately, well acquainted with whatever regards its substance.
The pastor, therefore, will teach, in clear, unambiguous language intelligible to every capacity, that the true and essential form of baptism is: "I BAPTIZE THEE IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST:" a form delivered by our Lord and Saviour when, as we read in St. Matthew, he gave to his Apostles the command: " Going teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." By the word " baptizing," the Catholic Church, instructed from above, most justly understands that the form of the Sacrament should express the action of the minister, and this takes place when he pronounces the words: "I baptize thee." Besides the minister of the Sacrament, the person to be baptized and the principal efficient cause of baptism should be mentioned. The pronoun " thee," and the names of the Divine Persons are, therefore, distinctly added; and, thus, the absolute form of the Sacrament is expressed in the words already mentioned: " I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Baptism is the work not of the Son alone, of whom St. John says: " This is he who baptizeth;" but of the three Persons of the blessed Trinity. By saying, however, " in the name," not names, we distinctly declare that in the Trinity there is but one nature and Godhead. The word " name" is here referred not to the persons, but to the divine essence, virtue and power, which are one and the same in the three Persons.
It is however to be observed, that of the words contained in this form, which we have shown to be the true and essential one, some are absolutely necessary, the omission of them rendering the valid administration of the Sacrament impossible; whilst others, on the contrary, are not so essential as to affect its validity. Of the latter kind is, in the Latin form, the word " ego," (I) the force of which is included in the word " baptizo," (I baptize.) Nay more, the Greek Church, adopting a different manner of expressing the form, and being of opinion that it is unnecessary to make mention of the minister, omits the pronoun altogether. The form universally used in the Greek Church is: " Let this servant of Christ be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." It appears, however, from the opinion and definition of the Council of Florence, that the Greek form is valid, because the words of which it consists, sufficiently express what is essential to the validity of baptism, that is, the ablution which then takes place.
If at any time the Apostles baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ only, they did so, no doubt, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in order, in the infancy of the Church, to render their preaching in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ more illustrious, and to proclaim more effectually his divine and infinite power. If, however, we examine the matter more closely, we shall find that the Greek form omits nothing which the Saviour himself commands to be observed; for the name of Jesus Christ implies the Person of the Father by whom, and that of the Holy Ghost in whom he was anointed. However, the use of this form by the Apostles becomes, perhaps, matter of doubt, if we yield to the opinions of Ambrose and Basil, Holy Fathers eminent for sanctity and of paramount authority, who interpret " baptism in the name of Jesus Christ" as con tradistinguished to " baptism in the name of John," and who say that the Apostles did not depart from the ordinary and usual form which comprises the distinct names of the three Persons. Paul, also, in his epistle to the Galatians, seems to have expressed himself in a similar manner: " As many of you," says he, " as have been baptized in Christ, have put on Christ:" meaning that they were baptized in the faith of Christ, and with no other form than that commanded by him to be observed.
What has been said on the principal points which regard the matter and form of the Sacrament will be found sufficient for the instruction of the faithful: but, as in the administration of the Sacrament, the legitimate ablution should also be observed, on this point too the pastor will explain the doctrine of the Church. He will briefly inform the faithful that, according to the common practice of the Church, baptism may be administered by immersion, infusion, or aspersion; and that administered in either of these forms it is equally valid. In baptism water is used to signify the spiritual ablution which it accomplishes, and on this account baptism is called by the Apostle, a " laver." This ablution takes place as effectually by immersion, which was for a considerable time the practice in the early ages of the Church, as by infusion, which is now the general practice, or by aspersion, which was the manner in which Peter baptized, when he converted and gave baptism to about three thousand souls." It is also matter of indifference to the validity of the Sacrament, whether the ablution is performed once or thrice; we learn from the epistle of St. Gregory the great to Leander, that baptism was formerly and may still be validly administered in the Church in either way. The faithful, however, will follow the practice of the particular Church to which they belong.
The pastor will be particularly careful to observe, that the baptismal ablution is not to be applied indifferently to any part of the body, but principally to the head, which is pre-emiuently the seat of all the internal and external senses; and also that he who baptizes is to pronounce the words which constitute the form of baptism, not before or after, but when performing the ablution.
Baptism When these things have been explained, it will also be expedient to remind the faithful that, in common with the other Sacraments, baptism was instituted by Christ. On this subject, the pastor will frequently point out two different periods of time which relate to baptism the one the period of its institution by the Redeemer the other, the establishment of the law which renders it obligatory. With regard to the former, it is clear that this Sacrament was instituted by our Lord, when, being baptized by John, he gave to the water the power of sanctifying. St. Gregory Nazianzen and St. Augustine testify that to the water was then imparted the power of regenerating to spiritual life. In another place St. Augustine says: " From the moment that Christ is immersed in water, water washes away all sins:" and again the Lord is baptized, not because he had occasion to be cleansed, but by the contact of his pure flesh to purify the waters, and impart to them the power of cleansing." The circumstances which attended the event afford a very strong argument to prove that baptism was then instituted by our Lord. The three persons of the most Holy Trinity, in whose name baptism is conferred, manifest their august presence the voice of the Father is heard the Person of the*Son is present the Holy Ghost descends in form of a dove and the heavens, into which we are enabled to enter by baptism, are thrown open.
Should we, however, ask how our Lord has endowed water with a virtue so great, so divine; this indeed is an inquiry which transcends the power of the human understanding. That when our Lord was baptized, water was consecrated to the salutary use of baptism, deriving, although instituted before the passion, all its virtue and efficacy from the passion, which is the consummation, as it were, of all the actions of Christ this, in deed, we sufficiently comprehend.
The second period to be distinguished, that is, when the law of baptism was promulgated, also admits of no doubt. The Holy Fathers are unanimous in saying, that after the resurrection of our Lord, when he gave to his Apostles the command: " Go, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;" the law of baptism became obligatory, on all, who were to be saved. This is to be inferred from these words of St. Peter: " who hath re generated us unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, from the dead;" and also from the words of St Paul; " He delivered himself up for it:" (he speaks of the Church) that he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of water in the word of life." In both passages, the obligation of baptism is referred to the time, which followed the death of our Lord. These words of our Lord: " Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God," refer also, no doubt, to the time subsequent to his passion. If then the pastor use all diligence in explaining these truths accurately to the faithful, impossible that they should not fully appreciate the high dignity of this Sacrament, and entertain towards it the most profound veneration; a veneration which will be heightened by the reflection, that the Holy Ghost, by his invisible agency, still infuses into the heart, at the moment of baptism, those blessings of incomparable excellence, and of inestimable value, which were so strikingly manifested, by miracles, at the baptism of Christ our Lord. Were our eyes, like those of the servant of Eliseus, opened to see these heavenly things, who so insensible as not to be lost in rapturous admiration of the divine mysteries, which baptism would then present to the astonished view! when, therefore, the riches of this Sacrament are unfolded to the faithful by the pastor, so as to enable them to behold them, if not with the eyes of the body, with those of the soul illumined with the light of faith, is it not reasonable to anticipate similar results?
In the next place, it appears not only expedient but necessary, to say who are ministers of this Sacrament; in order that those to whom this office is specially confided, may study to perform its functions, religiously and holily; and that no one, outstepping as it were, his proper limits, may unseasonably take possession of, or arrogantly assume, what belongs to another; for, as the Apostle teaches, order is to be observed in all things.
The faithful, therefore, are to be informed that of those who administer baptism there are three gradations: bishops and priests hold the first place; to them belongs the administration of this Sacrament, not by any extraordinary concession of power, but by right of office; for to them, in the persons of the Apostles, was addressed the command: " Go, baptize." Bishops, it is true, not to neglect the more weighty charge of instructing the faithful, generally leave its administration to priests; but the authority of the Fathers, and the usage of the Church, prove that priests exercise this function of the ministry by a right inherent in the priestly order, a right which authorises them to baptize even in presence of the bishop. Ordained to consecrate the Holy Eucharist, the Sacrament of peace and unity, it is necessary that they be invested with power to administer all those things, which are required to enable others to participate of that peace and unity. If, therefore, the Fathers have at any time said, that without the leave of the bishop, the priest has not power to baptize; they are to be understood to speak of that baptism only, which was administered on certain days of the year with solemn ceremonies.
