The Sacraments · Baptism (2 of 4)
Deacons by Next to bishops and priests, are deacons, for whom, as permission. namerous decrees of the holy Fathers attest, it is not lawful, without the permission of the bishop or priest to administer baptism.
Those who may administer baptism, in case of necessity, but without its solemn ceremonies, hold the third and last place; and in this class are included all, even the laity, men and women, to whatever sect they may belong. This power extends, in case of necessity, even to Jews, infidels, and heretics; provided, however, they intend to do what the Catholic Church does in that act of her ministry. Already established by the decrees of the ancient Fathers and Councils, these things have been again confirmed by the Council of Trent, which denounces anathema against those who presume to say, " that baptism, even when administered by heretics, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, with the intention of doing what the Church does, is not true baptism."
And here let us admire the supreme goodness and wisdom of our Lord, who, seeing the necessity of this Sacrament for all, not only instituted water, than which nothing can be more common as its matter; but also placed its administration within the jurisdiction of all. In its administration, however, as we have already observed, all are not allowed to use the solemn ceremonies; not that rites and ceremonies are of higher dignity, but because they are of inferior necessity to the Sacrament. Let not the faithful, however, imagine that this office is given promiscuously to all, so as to supersede the propriety of observing a certain order amongst those who administer baptism: when a man is present, a woman; when a clerk, a layman; when a priest, a simple clerk, should not administer this Sacrament. Midwives, however, when accustomed to its administration, are not to be found fault with, if sometimes, when a man is present, who is unacquainted with the manner of its administration, they perform what may otherwise appear to belong more properly to men.
To those who, as we have hitherto explained, administer baptism, another class of persons is to be added, who, according to the most ancient practice of the Church, assist at the baptismal font; and, who, although formerly called by sacred writers by the common name of sponsors or sureties, are now called God-fathers and God-mothers. As this is an office common almost to all the laity, the pastor will teach its principal duties, with care and accuracy. He will, in the first instance, explain why at baptism, besides those who administer the Sacrament, God fathers and God-mothers are also required. The propriety of the practice will at once appear, if we keep in view the nature of baptism, that it is a spiritual regeneration, by which we are born children of God; of which St. Peter says: " As newborn infants desire the rational milk without guile." As, therefore, every one, after his birth, requires a nurse and instructor, by whose assistance and assiduity he is brought up, and formed to learning and morality; so those, who, by the efficacy of the regenerating waters of baptism, are born to spiritual life, should be intrusted to the fidelity and prudence of some one, from whom they may imbibe the precepts of the Christian religion, and the spirit of Christian piety; and thus grow up gradually in Christ, until, with the divine assistance, they at length arrive at the full growth of perfect manhood. This necessity must appear still more imperious, if we recollect, that the pastor, who is charged with the public care of his parish, has not sufficient time to undertake the private instruction of children in the rudiments of faith. For this very ancient practice, we have this illustrious testimony of St. Denis: " It occurred," says he, " to our divine leaders," (so he calls the Apostles,) " and they in their wisdom ordained, that infants should be introduced into the Church, in this holy manner that their natural parents should deliver them to the care of some one well skilled in divine things, as to a master under whom, as a spiritual father and guardian of his salvation in holiness, the child may lead the remainder of his life." The same doctrine is confirmed by the authority of Higinus.
The Church, therefore, in her wisdom, has ordained that not only the person who baptizes, contracts a spiritual affinity with the person baptized, but also the sponsor with the God-child and its parents: so that marriage cannot be lawfully contracted by them, and if contracted, it is null and void.
The faithful are also to be taught the duty of sponsors; for such is the negligence with which the office of sponsor is treated in the Church, that its name only remains; whilst few, if any, have the least idea of its sanctity. Let all sponsors then, at all times recollect that they are strictly bound to exercise a constant vigilance over their spiritual children, and carefully to instruct them in the maxims of a Christian life; that they may approve themselves through life, such as their sponsors promised they should be, by the solemn ceremony of becoming sponsors. On this subject, the words of St. Denis demand attention: Speak ing in the person of the sponsor, he says: " I promise, by my constant exhortations to induce this child, when he comes to a knowledge of religion, to renounce everything opposed to his Christian calling, and to profess and perform the sacred promises, which he made at the baptismal font." St. Augustine also says: "I most earnestly admonish you, men and women, who have become sponsors, to consider that you stood as sureties before God, for those whose sponsors you have undertaken to become. " And, indeed, it is the paramount duty of every man, who undertakes any office, to be indefatigable in the discharge of the duties which it imposes; and he, who solemnly professed to be the teacher and guardian of another, should not abandon to destitution him whom he once received under his care and protection, as long as he should have occasion for either. Speak ing of the duties of sponsors, St. Augustine comprises, in a few words, the lessons of instruction which they are bound to in culcate upon the minds of their spiritual children: " They ought," says he, " to admonish them to observe chastity, love justice, cherish charity; and, above all, they should teach them the Creed, the Lord's prayer, the ten commandments, and the rudiments of the Christian religion."
Hence, it is not difficult to decide, who are inadmissible as sponsors. To those, who are unwilling to discharge its duties with fidelity, or who cannot do so with care and accuracy, this sacred trust, no doubt, should not be confided. Besides, there fore, the natural parents, who, to mark the great difference that exists between this spiritual and the carnal bringing up of youth, are not permitted to undertake this charge, heretics, Jews particularly, and infidels, are on no account to be admitted to the office of sponsor. The thoughts and cares of these enemies of the Catholic Church, are, continually, employed in darkening, by falsehood, the true faith, and subverting all Christian piety.
The number of sponsors is also limited by the Council of Trent, to one male or female; or at most, to one male and one female; because a number of teachers may confuse the order of discipline and instruction; and also to prevent the multiplication of affinities, which must impede a wider diffusion of society by means of lawful marriage.
If the knowledge of what has been hitherto explained, be, as it is, of importance to the faithful, it is no less important to them to know, that the law of baptism, as established by our Lord, extends to all, in so much, that unless they are regenerated through the grace of baptism, be their parents Christians or infidels, they are born to eternal misery and everlasting destruction. The duty of the pastor, therefore, demands of him a frequent exposition of these words of the Gospel: " Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."
That this law extends, not only to adults, but also to infants, and that the Church has received this its interpretation from Apostolic tradition, is confirmed by the authority and strengthened by the concurrent testimony of the Fathers. Besides, it is not to be supposed, that Christ our Lord, would have with held the Sacrament of baptism, and the grace which it imparts from children, of whom he said: " Suffer the little children, and stay them not from coming unto me; for the kingdom of heaven is for such" from children whom he embraced upon whom he imposed hands whom he blessed. Moreover, when we read that an entire family was baptized by St. Paul, children, who are included in their number, must, it is obvious, have also been cleansed in the purifying waters of baptism. Circumcision, too, which was a figure of baptism, affords a strong argument in proof of this primitive practice. That children were circumcised on the eighth day is universally known. If, then, circumcision, "made by hand, in despoiling of the body of the flesh," was profitable to children, shall not baptism, which is the circumcision of Christ, not " made by hand," be also profitable to them? Finally, to use the words of the Apostle, " if by one man's offence, death reigned through one; much more they who receive abundance of grace, and of the gift, and of justice, shall reign in life through one, Jesus Christ." If, then, through the transgression of Adam, children inherit the stain of primeval guilt, is there not still stronger reason to conclude, that the efficacious merits of Christ the Lord must impart to them that justice and those graces, which will give them a title to reign in eternal life? This happy consummation baptism alone can accomplish. The pastor, therefore, will inculcate the absolute necessity of administering baptism to infants, and of gradually forming their tender minds to piety, by Christian precept; according to these admirable words of the Wiseman: " A young man according to his way, even when he is old, he will not depart from it."
That when baptized they receive the mysterious gifts of faith cannot be matter of doubt; not that they believe by the formal assent of the mind, but because their incapacity is supplied by the faith of their parents, if the parents profess the true faith, if not, (to use the words of St. Augustine) "by that of the universal society of the saints;" for they are said with propriety to be presented for baptism by all those, to whom their initiation in that sacred rite was a source of joy, and by whose charity they are united to the communion of the Holy Ghost.
The faithful are earnestly to be exhorted, to take care that their children be brought to the church, as soon as it can be done with safety, to receive solemn baptism: infants, unless possible, baptized, cannot enter heaven, and hence we may well conceive how deep the enormity of their guilt, who, through negligence, suffer them to remain without the grace of the sacrament, long er than necessity may require; particularly at an age so tender as to be exposed to numberless dangers of death. With regard to adults who enjoy the perfect use of reason, persons, for instance, born of infidel parents, the practice of the primitive Church points out a different manner of proceeding: to them the Christian faith is to be proposed; and they are earnestly to be exhorted, allured, and invited to embrace it. If converted to the Lord God, they are then to be admonished, not to defer baptism beyond the time prescribed by the Church: it is written, " delay not to be converted to the Lord, and defer it not from day to day;" and they are to be taught, that in their regard perfect conversion consists in regeneration by baptism. Besides, the longer they defer baptism, the longer are they deprived of the use and graces of the other Sacraments, which fortify in the practice of the Christian religion, and which are accessible through baptism only. They are also deprived of the inestimable graces of baptism, the salutary waters of which not only wash away all the stains of past sins, but also enrich the soul with divine grace, which enables the Christian to avoidsin for the future, and preserve the invaluable treasures of righteousness and innocence: effects which, confessedly, constitute a perfect epitome of a Christian life.
On this class of persons, however, the Church does not confer this Sacrament hastily: she will have it deferred for a certain time; nor is the delay attended with the same danger as in the case of infants, which we have already mentioned: and should any unforeseen accident deprive adults of baptism, their intention of receiving it, and their repentance for past sins, will avail them to grace and righteousness. Nay, this delay seems to be attended with some advantages. The Church must take particular care, that none approach this Sacrament, whose hearts are vitiated by hypocrisy and dissimulation; and, by the intervention of some delay, the intentions of such as solicit baptism, are better ascertained. In this wise precaution originated a decree, passed by the ancient councils, the purport of which was, that Jewish converts, before admission to baptism, should spend some months in the ranks of the Catechumens. The candidate for baptism is, also, thus better instructed in the faith which he is to profess, and in the morality which he is to practise; and the Sacrament, when administered with solemn ceremonies, on the appointed days of Easter and Pentecost only, is treated with more religious respect.
Sometimes, however, when there exists a just cause to exclude delay, as in the case of imminent danger of death, its administration is not to be deferred; particularly, if the person to be baptized is well instructed in the mysteries of faith. This we find to have been done by Philip, and by the prince of the Apostles, when, without the intervention of any delay, the one baptized the Eunuch of queen Candaces, the other, Cornelius, as soon as they professed a willingness to embrace the faith of Christ. The faithful are, also, to be instructed in the necessary dispositions for baptism, that, in the first place, they must desire and purpose to receive it; for, as in baptism we die to sin and engage to live a new life, it is fit that it be administered to those, only, who receive it of their own free will and accord, and is to be forced upon none. Hence, we learn from holy tradition, that it has been the invariable practice of the Church, to administer baptism to no individual, without previously asking him if he be willing to receive it. This disposition even infants are presumed not to want the will of the Church, when answering for them, is declared in the most explicit terms.
Insane persons, who are favoured with lucid intervals, and, during these lucid intervals, express no wish to be baptized, are not to be admitted to baptism, unless in extreme cases when death is apprehended. In such cases, if, previously to their insanity, they give intimation of a wish to be baptized, the Sacrament is to be administered; without such indication previously given, they are not to be admitted to baptism; and the same rule is to be followed with regard to persons in a state of lethargy. But if they never enjoyed the use of reason, the authority and practice of the Church decide, that they are to be baptized in the faith of the Church, on the same principle that children are baptized, before they come to the use of reason.
Besides a wish to be baptized, in order to obtain the grace of the Sacrament, faith, for the same reason, is also necessary: our Lord has said: "he that believes and is baptized shall be saved." Another necessary condition is compunction for past sins, and a fixed determination to refrain from their future commission: should any one dare to approach the baptismal font, a slave to vicious habits, he should be instantly repelled, for what so obstructive to the grace and virtue of baptism, as the obdurate impenitence of those who are resolved to persevere in the indulgence of their unhallowed passions? Baptism should be sought with a view to put on Christ and to be united to him; and it is, therefore, manifest that he who purposes to persevere in sin, should be repelled from the sacred font, particularly if we recollect that none of those things which belong to Christ and his Church, are to be received in vain, and that, as far as regards sanctifying and saving grace, baptism is received in vain by him who purposes to live according to the flesh, and not according to the spirit. As far, however, as regards the validity of the Sacrament, if, when about to be baptized, the adult intends to receive what the Church administers, he no doubt, validly receives the Sacrament. Hence, to the vast multitude, who, as the Scripture says, "being compunct in heart," asked him and the other Apostles what they should do, Peter answered: "Do penance and be baptized, every one of you;" and in another place: "Repent ye, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out." Writing to the Romans, St. Paul also clearly shows, that he who is baptized should entirely die to sin; and he therefore admonishes us, "not to yield our members as instruments of iniquity unto sin; but present ourselves to God, as those that are alive from the dead."
Frequent reflection upon these truths cannot fail, in the first place, to fill the minds of the faithful with admiration of the infinite goodness of God, who, uninfluenced by any other consideration than that of his own tender mercy, gratuitously bestowed upon us, undeserving as we are, a blessing such as baptism—a blessing so extraordinary, so divine!If, in the next place, they consider how spotless should be the lives of those, who have been made the objects of such singular munificence, they cannot fail to be convinced of the imperative obligation imposed upon them, to spend each day of their lives in such sanctity and religious fervour, as if it were that on which they had received the sacrament and were ennobled by the grace of baptism. To inflame their minds, however, with a zeal for true piety, the pastor will find no means more efficacious than an accurate exposition of the effects of baptism.
As, then, these effects are to afford matter of frequent instruction, that the faithful may be rendered more sensible of the high dignity to which they are raised by baptism, and may never suffer themselves to be degraded from its elevation by the disguised artifices or open assaults of Satan, they are to be taught, in the first place, that such is the admirable efficacy of first effect this sacrament as to remit original sin, and actual guilt however enormous. This its transcendant efficacy was foretold long before by Ezekiel, through whom God said: "I will pour upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness." The Apostle also, writing to the Corinthians, after having enumerated a long catalogue of crimes, adds: "such you were, but you are washed, but you are sanctified." That such was, at all times, the doctrine of the Catholic Church, is not matter of doubtful inquiry: "By the generation of the flesh," says St. Augustine, in his book on the baptism of infants, "we contract original sin only; by the regeneration of the Spirit, we obtain forgiveness not only of original, but also of actual guilt." St. Jerome, also, writing to Oceanus, says: "All sins are forgiven in baptism." To obviate the possibility of doubt upon the subject, the Council of Trent, to the definitions of former Councils, has added its own distinct declaration, by pronouncing anathema against those, who should presume to think otherwise, or should dare to assert "that although sin is forgiven in baptism, it is not entirely removed, or totally eradicated; but is cut away in such a manner, as to leave its roots still firmly fixed in the soul." To use the words of the same holy Council: "God hates nothing in those who are regenerated, for in those who are truly buried with Christ, by baptism, unto death, 'who walk not according to the flesh,' there is no condemnation: putting of the old man, and putting on the new, which is created according to God, they become innocent, spotless, innoxious, and beloved of God."
That concupiscence, however, or the fuel of sin, still remains, as the Council declares in the same place, must be acknowledged: but concupiscence does not constitute sin, for, as St. Augustine observes, "in children, who have been baptized, the guilt of concupiscence is removed, the concupiscence itself remains for our probation;" and in another place: "the guilt of concupiscence is pardoned in baptism, but its infirmity remains." Concupiscence is the effect of sin, and is nothing more than an appetite of the soul, in itself repugnant to reason. If unaccompanied with the consent of the will, or unattended with neglect on our part, it differs essentially from the nature of sin. This doctrine does not dissent from these words of St. Paul: "I did not know concupiscence, if the law did not say: 'thou shalt not covet.'" The apostle speaks not of the importunity of concupiscence, but of the sinfulness of the interior act of the will, in assenting to its solicitations. The same doctrine is taught by St. Gregory, when he says: "If there are any who assert that, in baptism, sin is but superficially effaced, what can savour more of infidelity than the assertion? By the Sacrament of Baptism sin is utterly eradicated, and the soul adheres entirely to God." In proof of this doctrine he has recourse to the testimony of our Lord himself, who says in St. John: "He that is washed, needeth not but to wash his feet, but he is wholly clean."
