The Sacraments · Baptism (3 of 4)
But should illustration be desired, an express figure and image of the efficacy of baptism will be found in the history of the leprosy of Naaman the Syrian, of whom the Scriptures inform us, that when he had washed seven times in the waters of the Jordan, he was so cleansed from his leprosy, that his flesh became "like the flesh of a child." The remission of all sin, original and actual, is therefore the peculiar effect of baptism. That this was the object of its institution by our Lord and Saviour, is a truth clearly deduced from the testimony of St. Peter, to say nothing of the array of evidence that might be adduced from other sources: "Do penance," says he, "and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins."
But in baptism, not only is sin forgiven, but with it all the punishment due to sin is remitted by a merciful God. To communicate the virtue of the passion of Christ is an effect common to all the Sacraments; but of baptism alone does the Apostle say, that "by it we die and are buried together with Christ." Hence the Church has uniformly taught, that to impose those offices of piety, usually called by the Fathers works of satisfaction, on him, who is to be cleansed in the salutary waters of baptism, would be derogatory in the highest degree to the dignity of this Sacrament. Nor is there any discrpancy between the doctrine here delivered and the practice of the primitive Church, which of old commanded the Jews, when preparing for baptism, to observe a fast of forty days. The fast thus imposed was not enjoined as a work of satisfaction: it was a practical lesson of instruction to those who were to receive the Sacrament; and one well calculated to impress upon their minds a deeper sense of the august dignity of a rite, of which they were not admitted to be participators, without devoting some time to the uninterrupted exercise of fasting and prayer.
But, although the remission by baptism of the punishments due to sin cannot be questioned, we are not hence to infer that it gives the offender an exemption from undergoing the punishments awarded by the civil laws to public delinquency—that, for instance, it rescues from the hand of justice the man who is legally condemned to forfeit his life to the violated laws of his country. We cannot, however, too highly commend the religion and piety of those princes, who, on some occasions, remit the sentence of the law, that the glory of God may be the more strikingly displayed in his Sacraments. Baptism also remits all the punishment due to original sin in the next life, and this it does through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. By baptism, as we have already said, we die with Christ, "for if," says the Apostle, "we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection."
Should it be asked why, after baptism, we are not exempt in this life from these inconveniences, which flow from original sin, and restored by the influence of this Sacrament to that state of perfection, in which Adam, the father of the human race, was placed before his fall; for this two principal reasons are assigned: the first, that we, who by baptism are united to, and become members of Christ's body, may not be more honoured than our head. As, therefore, Christ, our Lord, although clothed from his birth with the plenitude of grace and truth, was not divested of human infirmity, until, having suffered and died, he rose to the glory of immortality; it cannot appear extraordinary, if the faithful, even after they have received the grace of justification by baptism, are clothed with frail and perishable bodies; that after having undergone many labours for the sake of Christ, and having closed their earthly career, they may be recalled to life, and found worthy to enjoy with him an eternity of bliss.
The second reason why corporal infirmity, disease, sense of pain, and motions of concupiscence, remain after baptism, is, that in them we may have the germs of virtue from which we shall hereafter receive a more abundant harvest of glory, and treasure up to ourselves more ample rewards. When, with patient resignation, we bear up against the trials of this life, and aided by the divine assistance, subject to the dominion of reason the rebellious desires of the heart, we may and ought to cherish an assured hope, that the time will come when, if with the Apostle we shall have "fought a good fight, finished the course, and kept the faith, the Lord, the just judge, will render to us, on that day, a crown of justice, which is laid up for us." Such seems to have been the divine economy with regard to the children of Israel: God delivered them from the bondage of Egypt, having drowned Pharaoh and his host in the sea; yet he did not conduct them immediately into the happy land of promise. He first tried them by a variety and multiplicity of sufferings; and when he afterwards placed them in possession of the promised land, he expelled from their native territories, the other inhabitants; whilst a few other nations, whom they could not exterminate, remained, that the people of God might never want occasions to exercise their warlike fortitude and valour.
To these we may add another consideration, which is, that if to the heavenly gifts with which the soul is adorned in baptism, were appended temporal advantages, we should have good reason to doubt whether many might not approach the baptismal font, with a view to obtain such advantages in this life, rather than the glory to be hoped for in the next; whereas the Christian should always propose to himself, not the delusive and uncertain things of this world, "which are seen," but the solid and eternal enjoyments of the next, "which are not seen." This life, however, although full of misery, does not want its pleasures and joys. To us, who by baptism are engrafted as branches on Christ, what source of purer pleasure, what object of nobler ambition, than, taking up our cross, to follow him as our leader, fatigued by no labour, retarded by no danger in pursuit of the rewards of our high vocation; some to receive the laurel of virginity, others the crown of doctors and confessors, some the palm of martyrdom, others the honours appropriated to their respective virtues? These splendid titles of exalted dignity none of us should receive, had we not contended in the race, and stood unconquered in the conflict.
But to return to the effects of baptism, the pastor will teach that, by virtue of this Sacrament, we are not only delivered from what are justly deemed the greatest of all evils, but are also enriched with invaluable goods. Our souls are replenished with divine grace, by which, rendered just and children of God we are made coheirs to the inheritance of eternal life; for it in written, "he that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved;" and the Apostle testifies, that the Church is cleansed, "by the laver of water, in the word of life." But grace, according to the definition of the Council of Trent, a definition to which, under pain of anathema, we are bound to defer, not only remits sin, but is also a divine quality inherent in the soul, and, as it were a brilliant light that effaces all those stains which obscure the lustre of the soul, and invests it with increased brightness and beauty. This is also a clear inference from the words of Scripture when it says, that grace is "poured forth," and also when it calls grace, "the pledge" of the holy Ghost.
The progress of grace in the soul is also accompanied by a most splendid train of virtues; and hence, when writing to Titus, the Apostle says: "He saved us by the laver of regeneration, and renovation of the Holy Ghost, whom he hath poured forth upon us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Saviour;" St. Augustine, in explanation of the words, "poured forth on us abundantly," says, "that is, for the remission of sins, and for abundance of virtues."
By baptism we are also united to Christ, as members to theirhead: as, therefore, from the head proceeds the power by which the different members of the body are impelled to the proper performance of their peculiar functions; so from the fulness of Christ the Lord, are diffused divine grace and virtue through all those who are justified, qualifying them for the performance of all the offices of Christian piety.
We are, it is true, supported by a powerful array of virtues. It should not, however, excite our surprise if we cannot, without much labour and difficulty undertake, or, at least, perform acts of piety, and of moral virtue. If this is so, it is not because the goodness of God has not bestowed on us the virtues from which these actions emanate; but because there remains, after baptism, a severe conflict of the flesh against the spirit, in which, however, it would not become a Christian to be dispirited or grow faint. Relying on the divine goodness, we should confidently hope, that by a constant habit of leading a holy life, the time will arrive, when "whatever things are modest, whatever just, whatever holy," will also prove easy and agreeable. Be these the subjects of our fond consideration; be these the objects of our cheerful practice; that "the God of peace may be with us."
By baptism, moreover, we are sealed with a character that can never be effaced from the soul, of which, however, it were here superfluous to speak at large, as in what we have already said on the subject, when treating of the Sacraments in general, the pastor will find sufficient matter on the subject, to which he may refer.
But as from the nature and efficacy of this character, it has been defined by the Church, that this Sacrament is on no account to be reiterated, the pastor should frequently and diligently admonish the faithful on this subject, lest at any time they may err on a matter of such moment. The doctrine which prohibits the reiteration of baptism, is that of the Apostle, when he says: "One Lord, one faith, one baptism." Again, when exhorting the Romans, that dead in Christ by baptism, they lose not the life which they received from him, he says: "In that Christ died to sin, he died once;" he seems clearly to signify that as Christ cannot die again, neither can we die again by baptism. Hence the Church openly professes that she believes "one baptism;" and that this accords with the nature and object of the Sacrament appears from the very idea of baptism,, which is a spiritual regeneration. As then, according to the laws of nature, we are born but once, and "our birth," as St. Augustine observes, "cannot be repeated," so, in the supernatural order, there is but one spiritual regeneration, and, therefore, baptism can never be administered a second time.
Nor let it be supposed, that this Sacrament is repeated by the Church, when she admits to the baptismal font those of whose previous baptism reasonable doubts are entertained, making use of this form: "if thou art already baptized, I baptize thee not again; but if thou are not already baptized, I baptize thee in name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:" in such cases baptism is not to be considered as repeated (its repetition would be an impiety), but as holily, because conditionally administered.
In this, however, the pastor should use particular precaution, in order to avoid certain abuses which are of almost daily occurrence, to the no small irreverence of this Sacrament. There are those who think that they commit no sin by the indiscriminate administration of conditional baptism: if a child is brought before them, they imagine that inquiry as to its previous baptism is unnecessary, and accordingly proceed, without delay, to administer the Sacrament. Nay more, having ascertained that the child received private baptism, they hesitate not to repeat its administration conditionally, making use, at the same time, of the solemn ceremonies of the Church! Such temerity in curs the guilt of sacrilege, and involves the minister in what theologians call an "irregularity." It has been authoritatively decided by pope Alexander, that the conditional form of baptism is to be used only when, after due inquiry, doubts are entertained of the validity of the previous baptism; and in no other case can it ever be lawful to administer baptism a second time, even conditionally.
Besides the many other advantages which accrue to us from baptism, we may look upon it as the last, to which all the rest seem to be referred, that it opens to us the portals of Heaven, which sin had closed against our admission. All these effects, which are wrought in us by virtue of this Sacrament, are distinctly marked by the circumstances which, as the Gospel relates, accompanied the baptism of our Saviour. The heavens were opened and the Holy Ghost appeared descending upon Christ our Lord, in form of a dove; by which we are given to understand, that to those who are baptized are imparted the gifts of the Holy Spirit, that to them are unfolded the gates of Heaven, opening to them an entrance into glory; not, it is true, immediately after baptism, but in due season, when freed from the miseries of this life, which are incompatible with a state of bliss, they shall exchange a mortal for an immortal life.
These are the fruits of baptism, which, as far as regards the efficacy of the Sacrament, are, no doubt, common to all; but as far as regards the dispositions with which it is received, it is no less certain that all do not participate equally of these heavenly gifts and graces.
It now remains to explain, clearly and concisely, what regards the prayers, rites, and ceremonies of this Sacrament. To rites and ceremonies may, in some measure, be applied what the Apostle says of the gift of tongues, that it is unprofitable to speak, unless he who hears understands. They present an image, and convey the signification of the things that are done in the Sacrament; but if the people understand not their force and significancy, they can be of very little advantage to them. To make them understood, therefore, and to impress the minds of the faithful with a conviction that, although not of absolute necessity, they are of very great importance, and challenge great veneration, are matters which solicit the zeal and industry of the pastor. This, the authority of those by whom they were instituted, who were, no doubt, the Apostles, and also the object of their institution, sufficiently prove. That ceremonies contribute to the more religious and holy administration of the Sacraments, serve to exhibit to the eyes of the beholder a lively picture of the exalted and inestimable gifts which they contain, and impress on the minds of the faithful a deeper sense of the boundless beneficence of God, are truths as obvious as they are unquestionable.
But that in his expositions the pastor may follow a certain order, and that the people may find it easier to recollect his instructions, all the ceremonies and prayers which the Church uses in the administration of baptism, are to be reduced to three heads. The first comprehends such as are observed before coming to the baptismal font—the second, such as are used at the font—the third, those that immediately follow the administration of the Sacrament.
In the first place, then, the water to be used in baptism should be previously prepared: the baptismal water is consecrated with the oil of mystic unction; and this cannot be done at all times, but, according to ancient usage, on the vigils of certain festivals, which are justly deemed the greatest and the most holy solem nities in the year, and on which alone, except in cases of necessity, it was the practice of the ancient Church to administer baptism. But although the Church, on account of the dangers to which life is continually exposed, has deemed it expedient to change her discipline in this respect, she still observes with the greatest solemnity the festivals of Easter and Pentecost, on which the baptismal water is to be consecrated.
After the consecration of the water, the other ceremonies that precede baptism, are next to be explained. The person to be baptized is brought or conducted to the door of the church, and is forbidden to enter, as unworthy to be admitted into the house of God, until he has cast off the yoke of the most degrading servitude of Satan, devoted himself unreservedly to Christ, and pledged his fidelity to the just sovereignty of the Lord Jesus.
The priest then asks what he demands of the Church of God; and having received the answer, he first instructs him catechetically, in the doctrines of the Christian faith, of which a profession is to be made in baptism. This practice of thus communicating instruction originated, no doubt, in the precept of our Lord, addressed to his Apostles: "Go ye into the whole world, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you;" words from which we may learn that baptism is not to be administered until, at least, the principal truths of religion are explained. But as the catechetical form consists of question and answer; if the person to be instructed be an adult, he himself answers the interrogatories; if an infant, the sponsor answers according to the prescribed form, and enters into a solemn engagement for the child.
The exorcism comes next in order: it consists of words of sacred and religious import, and of prayers; and is used to expel the devil, to weaken and crush his power. To the exorcism are added other ceremonies, each of which, being mystical, has its clear and proper signification. When, for in stance, salt is put into the mouth of the person to be baptized, it evidently imports, that by the doctrines of faith, and by the gift of grace, he shall be delivered from the corruption of sin, shall experience a relish for good works, and shall be nurtured with the food of divine wisdom. Again, his forehead, eyes, breast, shoulders, ears, are signed with the sign of the cross, to declare, that by the mystery of baptism, the senses of the person baptized are opened and strengthened, to enable him to receive God, and to understand and observe his commandments. His nostrils and ears are next touched with spittle, and he is then immediately admitted to the baptismal font: by this ceremony we understand that, as sight was given to the blind man, mentioned in the Gospel, whom the Lord, having spread clay on his eyes, commanded to wash them in the waters of Siloe; so by the efficacy of holy baptism, a light is let in on the mind, which enables it to discern heavenly truth.
After the performance of these ceremonies, the person to be baptized approaches the baptismal font, at which are performed other rites and ceremonies, which present a summary of the obligations imposed by the Christian religion. In three distinct interrogatories, he is formally asked by the minister of religion, "dost thou renounce Satan?" "and all his works?" "and all his pomps?"—to each of which he, or the sponsor in his name, replies in the affirmative. Whoever, then, purposes to enlist under the standard of Christ, must, first of all, enter into a sacred and solemn engagement to renounce the devil and the world, and, as his worst enemies, to hold them in utter detestation.
He is next anointed with the oil of catechumens on the breast and between the shoulders—on the breast, that by the gift of the Holy Ghost he may lay aside error and ignorance, and receive the true faith; for "the just man liveth by faith"—on the shoulders, that by the grace of the Holy Spirit he may be enabled to shake off negligence and torpor, and engage actively in the performance of good works; for "faith without works is dead."
When baptism is now about to be administered, the priest asks him if he will be baptized; to which an answer in the affirmative being given by him, or, if an infant, by the sponsor, the priest performs the ablution, "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." As man, by yielding the assent of his will to the wicked suggestions of Satan, fell under a just sentence of condemnation; so God will have none enrolled in the number of his soldiers, but those whose service is voluntary; that by a willing obedience to his commands they may obtain eternal salvation.
After the person has been baptized, the priest anoints with chrism the crown of his head, thus giving him to understand, that from the moment of his baptism, he is united as a member to Christ, his head, and ingrafted on his body; and that he is, therefore, called a Christian, from Christ, as Christ is so called from Chrism. What the Chrism signifies, the prayers offered by the priest, as St. Ambrose observes, sufficiently explain.
On the person baptized the priest then puts a white garment, saying, "receive this white garment, which mayest thou carry unstained before the judgment-seat of our Lord Jesus Christ; that thou mayest have eternal life. Amen." Instead of a white garment, infants because not formally dressed, receive a white kerchief, accompanied with the same words. According to the doctrine of the Holy Fathers this symbol signifies the glory of the resurrection to which we are born by baptism, the brightness and beauty with which the soul, when purified from the stains of sin, is invested, and the innocence and integrity which the person who has received baptism, should preserve through life.
