The Sacraments · The Holy Eucharist (1 of 4)
On the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
OF all the sacred mysteries bequeathed to us by our Lord, as unfailing sources of grace, there is none that can be compared to the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; for no crime, therefore, is there reserved by God a more terrible vengeance than for the sacrilegious abuse of this adorable Sacrament, which is replete with holiness itself. The Apostle, illumined with wisdom from above, clearly saw and emphatically announced these awful consequences, when having declared the enormity of their guilt, " who discern not the body of the Lord," he immediately added, " therefore are there many infirm and weak among you, and many sleep." That the faithful, there fore, deeply impressed with the divine honour due to this heavenly Sacrament, may derive from its participation, abundant fruit of grace, and escape the just anger of God, the pastor will explain with indefatigable diligence, all those things which seem best calculated to display its majesty.
Following the example of St. Paul, who declares to the Corinthians what he had received from the Lord, the pastor will begin by explaining to the faithful the circumstances of its institution: these he will find thus clearly recorded by the Evangelist our Lord, who "having loved his own, loved them to the end," to give them some admirable and divine pledge of this his love, aware that the hour was come when he should pass out of this world to the Father, by an effect of wisdom which transcends the order of nature, devised a means of being always present with his own. Having celebrated the feast of the pas chal lamb with his disciples, that the figure might give way to the reality, the shadow to the substance, " Jesus took bread, and giving thanks to God, blessed and brake, and gave to his disciples, and said, take ye and eat: This is my body, which shall be delivered for you: this do for the commemoration of me: and taking the chalice also after he had supped, he said, this chalice is the New Testament in my blood: this do, as often as you shall drink it in commemoration of me."
Satisfied that language could supply no one word sufficiently comprehensive to give full expression to the dignity and excellence of this Sacrament, sacred writers have endeavoured to express it by a variety of appellations. It is sometimes called " The Eucharist," a word which may be translated, " the good grace," or " the thanksgiving:" the propriety of the one appears from two considerations: the Eucharist gives a foretaste of eternal life, of which it is written: " The grace of God is life ever lasting:" it also contains Christ our Lord, the true grace, and the source of all heavenly gifts. The other translation is no less appropriate, for when we offer this most spotless victim, we render to God a homage of infinite value, in return for all the benefits which we have received from his bounty, particularly for the inestimable treasure of grace bestowed on us in this Sacrament. The word " thanksgiving," also accords with the conduct of our Lord, when instituting this mystery: "Taking bread, he brake it, and gave thanks" David too, contemplating the grandeur of this mystery, says, " He hath made a remembrance of his wonderful works, being a merciful and gracious Lord: he hath given food to them that fear him;" but he had premised these words of thanksgiving: " His work is praise and magnificence."
It is also frequently called "The Sacrifice," of which we shall treat more at large in the subsequent part of this exposition. It is also called " Communion," a word borrowed from the Apostle, when he says: " The chalice of benediction which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the body of the Lord?" " This Sacrament," to use the words of Damascene, " unites us to Christ, and renders us partakers of his flesh, and of his divinity, reconciles us to each other in the same Christ, and consolidates us as it were into one body." Hence it is also called the Sacrament of peace and charity; giving us to understand how unworthy the name of Christians are they who indulge in enmity; and that hatred, discord, and strife are to be banished the society of the faithful, as their worst enemies; an obligation which becomes still more imperative when we reflect that in the daily oblation of the sacred mysteries, we profess to study with watchful solicitude, to preserve peace and charity inviolate. Sacred writers also frequently call it " The Viaticum," as well because it is the spiritual food by which we are supported during our mortal pilgrimage: as also, because it prepares for us a passage to eternal happiness and everlasting glory. Hence, in accordance with the ancient practice of the Church, none of the faithful are suffered to depart this life without being previously fortified with this living bread from heaven. The name of "The Supper," has also been sometimes given to this Sacrament by the most ancient Fathers, in imitation of the Apostle, because it was instituted by our Lord at the saving mystery of The Last Supper. This circumstance, which regards the time of its institution, does not however, justify the inference that the Eucharist is to be consecrated or received by persons not fasting: the salutary practice of consecrating and receiving it fasting, introduced, as ancient writers record, by the Apostles, has always been observed in the Church.
Having thus premised an explanation of the names by which this Sacrament is distinguished, the pastor will teach that it has all the qualities of a true Sacrament, and is one of the seven which have been at all times recognised and revered by the Catholic Church. Immediately after the consecration of the chalice, it is called "a mystery of faith;" and to omit an almost innumerable host of sacred writers, vouchers of the same doctrine, that the holy Eucharist is a Sacrament is demonstrated by the very nature of a Sacrament. It has sensible and outward signs: it signifies and produces grace in the soul; and all doubt as to its institution by Christ is removed by the Apostle and the Evangelists. These circumstances, combining as they do to establish the truth of the Sacrament, supersede the necessity of pressing the matter by further argument.
That in the Eucharist there are many things to which sacred writers have occasionally given the name ol Sacrament, the pastor will particularly observe: sometimes its consecration, sometimes its reception, frequently the body and blood of our Lord which are contained in it, are called the Sacrament; because, as St. Augustine observes, this Sacrament consists of two things, the visible species of the elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. We also say that this Sacrament is to be adored, meaning of course, the body and blood of our Lord. But all these, it is obvious, obtain the name of Sacrament in its less strict sense: the species of bread and wine, strictly speaking, constitute the Sacrament.
The great points of difference between this and the other Sacraments are easily understood; the other Sacraments are perfected by the use of their matter, that is, by their administration; baptism, for instance, becomes a Sacrament when the ablution has been performed: the Eucharist is constituted a Sacrament by the sole consecration of the elements, and when preserved in a pyxis, or deposited in a tabernacle, under either species, it ceases not to be a Sacrament. In the material elements of which the other Sacraments are composed, no change takes place; in baptism, for instance, the water, in confirmation, the chrism, lose not in their administration, the nature of water and of oil; whilst in the Eucharist, that which before consecration was bread and wine, becomes, after consecration, really and substantially the body and blood of our Lord.
But although in the Eucharist the sacramental matter consists of two elements, that is, of bread and wine, yet, guided by the authority of the Church, we profess that they are elements, not of two, but of one Sacrament. This is proved by the very number of the Sacraments, which, according to the doctrine of apostolic tradition, and the definitions of the Councils of Lateran, Florence, and Trent, is confined to seven. It also follows from the nature of the Holy Eucharist; the grace which it imparts renders us one mystic body; and to accord with what it accomplishes, the Eucharist must constitute but one Sacrament one, not by consisting of one element, but by signifying one thing. Of this the analogy which exists between this our spiritual food, and the food of the body, furnishes an illustration. Meat and drink, although two different things, are used only for one object, the sustenance of the body; so should the two different species of the Sacrament, to signify the food of the soul, be significant of one thing only, and constitute therefore but one Sacrament. The justness of this analogy is sustained by these words of our Lord: " My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink indeed."
What the Sacrament of the Eucharist signifies, the pastor will also carefully explain, that on beholding the sacred mysteries, the faithful may also, at the same time, feed their souls on the contemplation of heavenly things. This Sacrament, then, is significant of three things the passion of Christ, a thing past divine grace, a thing present and eternal glory, a thing future. It is significant of the passion of Christ: " This do," says our Lord, "for a commemoration of me." "As often," says the Apostle, " as you shall eat this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show the death of the Lord, until he come." It is significant of divine grace, which is infused, on receiving this sacrament, to nurture and preserve the soul. As by Baptism, we are begotten to newness of life, and by Confirmation, are strengthened to resist Satan, and to profess openly the name of Christ; so, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, are we spiritually nurtured and supported. It is also significant of eternal glory, which, according to the divine promises, is reserved for us in our celestial country. These three things, distinguished as they are by different times, past, present, and future, the Holy Eucharist, although consisting of different species, marks as significantly as if they were but one.
To consecrate the Sacrament validly, to instruct the faithful in that of which it is the symbol, and to kindle in their souls an ardent desire of possessing the invaluable treasure which it signifies, it is of vital importance that the pastor make himself acquainted with its matter. The matter of this Sacrament is two-fold, consisting of wheaten bread, arid of wine pressed from the grape, mixed with a little water. The first element, then, (of the latter we shall treat hereafter) is bread: as the Evan gelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, testify: " Christ our Lord," say they, " took bread into his hands, blessed, and brake it, saying, THIS is MY BODY;" and according to St. John, he deno minated himself bread in these words: "I am the living bread that came down from heaven."
As, however, there are different sorts of bread, composed of different materials, such as wheat, barley, pease, or made in dif ferent manners, such as leavened and unleavened; it is to be observed that, with regard to the former, the sacramental mat ter, according to the words of our Lord, should consist of wheaten bread; for when we simply say bread, we mean, ac cording to common usage, " wheaten bread." This is also dis tinctly declared by a figure of the Holy Eucharist in the Old Testament: the Lord commanded that the loaves of proposition, which prefigured this Sacrament, should be made of " fine flour."
As, therefore, wheaten bread alone is the proper matter of this Sacrament, a doctrine handed down by Apostolic tradition, and confirmed by the authority of the Catholic Church; it may also be inferred from the circumstances in which the Eucharist was instituted, that this wheaten bread should be unleavened. It was consecrated and instituted by our Lord, on the first day of unleavened bread, a time when the Jews were prohibited by the law, to have leavened bread in their houses. Should the words of the Evangelist St. John, who says that all this was done before the Passover, be objected, the objection is one of easy solution: by " the day before the Pasch," St. John under stands the same day, which the other Evangelists designate " the first day of unleavened bread." He had for object, prin cipally, to mark the natural day, which does not commence until sunrise; and the first natural day of the Pasch, therefore, being Friday, " the day before the Pasch" means Thursday, on the evening of which the festival of unleavened bread be gan, and on which our Lord celebrated the Pasch and insti tuted the Holy Eucharist. Hence, St. Chrysostome understands the first day of unleavened bread to be the day, on the evening of which the unleavened bread was to be eaten. The peculiar propriety of the consecration of unleavened bread, to express that integrity and purity of heart, with which the faithful should approach this Sacrament, we learn from these words of the Apostle: " Purge out the old leaven, that you may be a new paste, as you are unleavened; for Christ our Pasch is sacrificed. Therefore, let us feast not with the old leaven, not with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth."
This property of the bread, however, is not to be considered so essential as that its absence must render the Sacrament null: both sorts, leavened and unleavened, are called by the common name, and have each the nature and properties, of bread. No one, however, should on his own individual authority, have the temerity to depart from the laudable rite, observed in the Church to which he belongs; and such departure is the less warrantable in priests of the Latin Church, commanded, as they are, by authority of the supreme Pontiff, to celebrate the sacred mysteries with unleavened bread only. With regard to the first element of this Sacrament, this exposition will be found sufficiently comprehensive. We may, however, observe in addition, that the quantity of bread to be used is not determined, depending as it does upon the number of communicants, a matter which cannot be defined.
We come next to treat of the second element of this Sacrament, which forms part of its matter, and consists of wine, pressed from the grape, mingled with a little water. That our Lord made use of wine, in the institution of this Sacrament, has been at all times the doctrine of the Catholic Church. He himself said: " I will not drink, henceforth, of this fruit of the vine, until that day." On these words of our Lord, St. Chrysostome observes: " Of the fruit of the vine, which certainly produces wine, not water; as if he had it in view, even at so early a period, to crush by the evidence of these words, the heresy which asserted that water alone is to be used in these mysteries." With the wine used in the sacred mysteries, the Church of God, however, has always mingled water because, as we know on the authority of councils and the testimony of St. Cyprian, our Lord himself did so; and also because this admixture renews the recollection of the blood and water which issued from his sacred side. The word water we also find used in the Apocalypse, to signify the people, and, therefore, water mixed with wine signifies the union of the faithful with Christ their head. This rite, derived from apostolic tradition, the Catholic Church has at all times observed. The propriety of mingling water with the wine rests, it is true, on authority so grave, that to omit the practice would be to incur the guilt of mortal sin; however, its sole omission would be insufficient to render the Sacrament null. But care must be taken not only to mingle water with the wine, but also to mingle it in small quantity; for in the opinion of ecclesiastical writers, the water is changed into wine. Hence, these words of Pope Honorius: " A pernicious abuse has prevailed, for a long time, amongst you, of using in the holy sacrifice a greater quantity of water than of wine; whereas in accordance with the rational practice of the Universal Church, the wine should be used in much greater quantity than the water." We have now treated of the only two elements of this Sacrament; and although some dared to do otherwise, many decrees of the Church justly enact that no celebrant offer any thing but bread and wine.
We now come to consider the aptitude of these two elements to declare those things of which they are the sensible signs, In the first place, they signify Christ, the true life of the world; for our Lord himself has said: " My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed." As, therefore, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ nourishes to eternal life those who receive it with purity and holiness, with great propriety is this Sacrament composed principally of those elements which sustain life; thus giving the faithful to understand that the soul is nurtured with grace by a participation of the precious body and blood of Christ. These elements serve also to prove the dogma of the real presence. Seeing, as we do, that bread and wine are every day changed by the power of nature, into human flesh and blood, we are, by the obvious analogy of the fact, the more readily induced to believe that the substance of the bread and wine is changed, by the celestial benediction, into the real body and blood of Christ. This admirable change also contributes to illustrate what takes place in the soul. As the bread and wine, although invisibly, are really and substantially changed into the body and blood of Christ, so are we, although interiorly and invisibly, yet really renewed to life, receiving in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the true life. Moreover, the body of the Church, although one, and undivided, consists of the union of many members, and of this mysterious union nothing is more strikingly illustrative than bread and wine. Bread is made from many grains, wine is pressed from many grapes, and thus are we too, although many, closely united by this mysterious bond of union, and made as it were one body.
The form The form to be used in the consecration of the bread, we now come to explain; not, however, with a view that the faithful should be taught these mysteries, unless necessity require it, (a knowledge of them is obligatory on ecclesiastics alone) but to obviate the possibility of mistakes on the part of the celebrant, through ignorance of the form; mistakes, were they to occur, as discreditable to the minister, as derogatory to the dignity of the divine mysteries. From the Evangelists Matthew and Luke, and also from the Apostle, we learn that the form of the Sacrament consists in these words: " THIS IS MY BODY." We read that when they had supped, " Jesus took bread, and blessed and brake and gave to his disciples, saying: take and eat, THIS is MY BODY;" and this form of consecration, made use of by Jesus Christ, has been uniformly and inviolably observed in the Catholic Church. The testimonies of the Fathers in proof of its legitimacy, may be here omitted; to enumerate them would prove an endless task. The decree of the Council of Florence to the same effect, because of easy access to all, it is also unnecessary to cite. The necessity of every other proof is superseded by these words of the Saviour: " This do for a commemoration of me." This command of our Lord embraces not only what he did, but also what he said, and has more immediate reference to his own words uttered not less for the purpose of effecting, than of signifying what they effected. That these words constitute the form is easily proved from reason alone. The form of a Sacrament is that which signifies what is accomplished in the Sacrament: what is accomplished in the Eucharist, that is the conversion of the bread into the true body of our Lord, the words " this is my body," signify and declare; they therefore constitute the form. The words of the Evangelist, " he blessed," go to support this reasoning. They are equivalent to saying: " taking bread, he blessed it, saying, this is my body." The words, " take and eat," it is true, precede the words " this is my body," but they evidently express the use, not the consecration oi the matter, and cannot, therefore constitute the form. But although not necessary to the consecration of the Sacrament, they are not, however, on any account, to be omitted. The conjunction " for," has also u place amongst the words of consecration; otherwise it would follow that if the Sacrament were not to be administered to any one, it should not, or even could not be consecrated; whereas, that the priest by pronouncing the words of our Lord, according to the institution and practice of the Church, truly consecrates the proper matter of the Sacrament, although it should after wards happen never to be administered, admits not the least shadow of doubt.
