The Sacraments · The Holy Eucharist (2 of 4)
The form of the consecration of the wine, the other element of this Sacrament, is, for the reasons assigned with regard to the bread, necessary to be accurately known, and clearly understood by the priest. It is firmly to be believed that the form of consecrating the chalice is comprehended in these words: " THIS IS THE CHALICE OF MY BLOOD OF THE NEW AND ETERNAL TESTAMENT: THE MYSTERY OF FAITH: WHICH SHALL BE SHED FOR YOU, AND FOR MANY TO THE REMISSION OF SINS." These words are for the most part taken from Scripture. Some of them, however, have been preserved in the Church by apostolic tradition. The words "this is the chalice" are taken from St. Luke, and are also mentioned by the Apostle. The words that immediately follow. " of my blood, or my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for you, and for many to the remission of sins," are taken in part from St. Luke, and in part from St. Matthew. The words " and eternal," and also the words "the mystery of faith," have been transmitted to us by holy tradition, the interpreter and guardian of Catholic unity. Of the legitimacy of this form we cannot entertain a shadow of doubt, if we attend to what has been already said of the form used in the consecration of the bread. The form to be used in the consecration of this element, should, confessedly, consist of words signifying that the substance of the wine is changed into the blood of our Lord: this the words already cited clearly declare; and therefore, they alone exclusively constitute the form.
They also express certain admirable fruits produced by the blood of Christ, which was shed on Calvary, fruits which be long in a special manner to this Sacrament. Of these one is admission into the eternal inheritance to which we have acquired a right by " the new and everlasting testament:" another is admission to righteousness by " the mystery of faith," for "God hath proposed" Jesus "to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to the showing of his justice, that he himself may be just, and the justifier of him, who is of the faith of Jesus Christ:" a third is the remission of sin.
But as the words of consecration are replete with mysteries, and are most appropriate in their application to our present subject, they demand a more minute consideration. When, there fore, it is said: " This is the chalice of my blood," these words are to be understood to mean: "This is my blood which is contained in this chalice." The mention of "the chalice," at the moment of its consecration, to be the drink of the faithful, is peculiarly appropriate: without its mention as the vessel in which it is contained, the words: " This is my blood," would not seem sufficiently to designate this supernatural species of drink. Next follow the words: "of the New Testament;" they are added to give us to understand, that the blood of the Saviour is not now given figuratively, as in the Old Law, of which we read in the Apostle, that without blood a Testament is not dedicated; but really and truly given, a prerogative peculiar to the New Testament. Hence the Apostle says: " There fore, Christ is the mediator of the New Testament, that by means of his death, they who. are called may receive the promise of eternal inheritance." The word "eternal" refers to the eternal inheritance, our title to which has been purchased by Christ the Lord, the eternal Testator. The words " mystery of faith," which are added, exclude not the reality, but signify that what lies concealed under the veil of mystery, and is far removed from the ken of mortal eye, is to be believed with the certainty of faith. Here, however, these words bear an import entirely different from that which they have when applied to baptism. Here, the mystery of faith consists in this, that we see by faith the blood of Christ, veiled under the species of wine; but baptism is properly called by us " the Sacrament," by the Greeks, "the mystery of faith," because it comprises the entire profession of the faith of Christ. There is also an other reason why the blood of our Lord is called " the mystery of faith." In its belief human reason experiences the greatest difficulties, because faith proposes to us to believe that the Son of God, God and man, suffered death for our redemption, a death signified by the Sacrament of his blood. His passion, therefore, is more appropriately commemorated here, in the words, "which shall be shed for the remission of sins," than at the consecration of his body. The separate consecration of the blood places before our eyes, in more vivid colours, his passion, crucifixion, and death. The additional words, "for you and for many," are taken, some from St. Matthew, some from St. Luke, and under the guidance of the Spirit of God, combined together by the Catholic Church. They serve emphatically to designate the fruit and advantages of his passion. Looking to the efficacy of the passion, we believe that the redeemer shed his blood for the salvation of all men; but looking to the advantages, which mankind derive from its efficacy, we find, at once, that they are not extended to the whole, but to a large proportion of the human race. When, therefore, our Lord said: " for you," he meant either those who were present, or those whom he had chosen from amongst the Jews, amongst whom were, with the exception of Judas, all his disciples with whom he then conversed; but when he adds, " for many," he would include the remainder of the elect from amongst the Jews and Gentiles. With great propriety there fore, were the words, for all, omitted, because here the fruit of the passion is alone spoken of, and to the elect only did his passion bring the fruit of salvation. This the words of the Apostle declare, when he says, that Christ was offered once, to take away the sins of many; and the same truth is conveyed in these words of our Lord recorded by St. John: "I pray for them, I pray not for the world; but for them whom thou hast given me, because they are thine." The words of consecration also convey many other truths; truths, however, which the pastor by the daily meditation and study of divine things, and aided by grace from above, will not find it difficult to discover.
To return to those things, of which the faithful are on no account to be suffered to remain ignorant, the pastor, aware of the awful denunciation of the Apostle against those who discern not the body of the Lord, will first of all impress on the minds of the faithful, the necessity of detaching, as much as possible, their minds and understandings from the dominion of the senses, for were they, with regard to this sublime mystery, to constitute the senses the only tribunal to which they are to appeal, the awful consequence must be, their precipitation into the extreme of impiety. Consulting the sight, the touch, the smell, the taste, and finding nothing but the appearances of bread and wine, the senses must naturally lead them to think, that this Sacrament contains nothing more than bread and wine. Their minds, therefore, are as much as possible to be withdrawn from subjection to the senses, and excited to the contemplation of the stupendous power of God.
The words The Catholic Church, then, firmly believes, and openly professes that in this Sacrament, the words of consecration accomplish three things; first, that the true and real body of Christ, the same that was born of the Virgin, and is now seated at the right hand of the Father in heaven, is rendered present in the Holy Eucharist; secondly, that however repugnant it may appear to the dictate of the senses, no substance of the elements remains in the Sacrament; and thirdly, a natural consequence from the two preceding, and one which the words of consecration also express, that the accidents which present themselves to the eyes, or other senses, exist in a wonderful and ineffable manner without a subject. The accidents of bread and wine we see; but they inhere in no substance, and exist independently of any. The substance of the bread and wine is so changed into the body and blood of our Lord, that they, altogether, cease to be the substance of bread and wine.
To proceed in order, the pastor will begin with the first, and give his best attention to show, how clear and explicit are the words of our Saviour, which establish the real presence of his body in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. When our Lord says: "This is my body, this is my blood," no man however ignorant, unless he labours under some obliquity of intellect, can mistake his meaning; particularly if he recollect, that the words " body" and " blood" refer to his human nature, the real assumption of which by the Son of God no Catholic can doubt. To use the admirable words of St. Hilary, a man not less eminent for piety than learning: "When our Lord himself declares, as our faith teaches us, that his flesh is meat indeed, what room can remain for doubt?" The pastor will also adduce another passage from Scripture in proof of this sublime truth: having recorded the consecration of bread and wine by our Lord, and also the administration of the sacred mysteries to the Apostles, by the hands of the Saviour, the Apostle adds: " But let a man prove himself, and so eat of that bread and drink of the chalice, for he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the body of the Lord." If, as heresy asserts, the Sacrament presents nothing to our veneration but a memorial and sign of the passion of Christ, why exhort the faithful, in language so energetic to prove themselves? The answer is obvious: by the heavy denunciation contained in the words "judgment," the Apostle marks the enormity of his guilt, who receives unworthily and distinguishes not from common food the body of the Lord, concealed beneath the eucharistic veil. The preceding words of the Apostle develope more fully his meaning: " The chalice of benediction," says he, " which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the body of the Lord?" words which prove to demonstration the real presence of Jesus Christ in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.
These passages of Scripture, are, therefore, to be expounded by the pastor, and he will emphatically press upon the attention of the faithful, that their meaning, in itself obvious, is placed beyond all doubt by the uniform interpretation and authority of the Holy Catholic Church. That such has been at all times the doctrine of the Church, may be ascertained in a two-fold manner; by consulting the Fathers who flourished in the early ages of the Church and in each succeeding century, who are the most unexceptionable witnesses of her doctrine, and all of whom teach in the clearest terms, and with the most entire unanimity, the dogma of the real presence; and also by appealing to the Councils of the Church, convened on this important subject. To adduce the individual testimony of each Father would prove an endless task enough, that we cite, or rather point out a few, whose testimony will afford a sufficient criterion by which to judge of the rest. Let St. Ambrose first declare his faith: in his book on " the Initiated" he says, that the same true body . of our Lord, which was assumed of the Virgin, is received in this Sacrament; a truth which he declares is to be believed with the certainty of faith; and in another place he distinctly tells us, that before consecration it is bread, but after consecration it is the flesh of Christ. St. Chrysostome, another witness of equal fidelity and weight, professes and proclaims this mysterious truth, particularly in his sixtieth homily on those who receive the sacred mysteries unworthily; and also in his forty-fourth and forty-fifth homilies on St. John: "Let us," says he, "obey, not contradict God, although what he says may seem contrary to our reason and our sight: his words cannot deceive, our senses are easily deceived." With the doctrine thus taught by St. Chrysostome, that uniformly taught by St. Augustine fully accords, particularly when in his explanation of the thirty-third Psalm, he says: "To carry himself in his own hands, is impossible to man, and peculiar to Christ alone; he was carried in his own hands, when giving his body to be eaten, he said, This is my body." To pass by Justin and Irenaeus, St. Cyril, in his fourth book on St. John, declares in such express terms, that the body of our Lord is contained in this Sacrament, that no sophistry can distort, no captious interpretations obscure his meaning. Should the pastor wish for additional testimonies of the Fathers, he will find it easy to add the Hilaries, the Jeromes, the Denises, the Damascenes, and a host of other illustrious names, whose sentiments on this most important subject he will find collected by the labour and industry of men eminent for piety and learning.
Another means of ascertaining the belief of the Church on matters of faith, is the condemnation of the contrary doctrine. That the belief of the real presence was that of the universal Church of God, unanimously professed by all her children, is demonstrated by a well authenticated fact. When in the eleventh century, Berengarius presumed to deny this dogma, asserting that the Eucharist was only a sign, the innovation was immediately condemned by the unanimous voice of the Christian world. The Council of Vercelli, convened by authority of Leo IX., denounced the heresy, and Berengarius himself retracted and anathematized his error. Relapsing, however, into the same infatuation and impiety, he was condemned by three different Councils, convened, one at Tours, the other two at Rome: of the two latter, one was summoned by Nicholas II., the other by Gregory VII. The general Council of Lateran held under Innocent III., further ratified the sentence; and the faith of the Catholic Church, on this point of doctrine, was more fully declared and more firmly established in the Councils of Florence and Trent.
If, then, the pastor carefully explain these particulars, his labours will be blessed with the effect of strengthening the weak, and administering joy and consolation to the pious; (of those who, blinded by error, hate nothing more than the light of truth, we waive all mention) and this two-fold effect will be more securely attained, as the faithful cannot doubt that this dogma is numbered amongst the articles of faith. Believing and confessing as they do, that the power of God is supreme, they must also believe that his omnipotence can accomplish the great work which we admire and adore in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; and again, believing as they do, the Holy Catholic Church, they must necessarily believe that the doctrine expounded by us, is that which was revealed by the Son of God.
But nothing contributes more to light up in the pious soul that spiritual joy, of which we have spoken; nothing is more fertile of spiritual fruit, than the contemplation of the exalted dignity of this most august Sacrament. From it we learn how great must be the perfection of the gospel dispensation, under which we enjoy the reality of that, which under the Mosaic Law was only shadowed by types and figures. Hence St. Denis, with a wisdom more than human, says that our Church is a mean between the synagogue and the heavenly Jerusalem, and participates of the nature of both. The perfection of the Holy Catholic Church, and her exalted glory, removed only by one degree from heaven, the faithful cannot sufficiently admire. In common with the inhabitants of heaven, we, too, possess Christ, God and man, present with us; but they, and in this they are raised a degree above us, are admitted to the actual enjoyment of the beatific vision; whilst we, with a firm and unwavering faith, offer the tribute of our homage to the Divine Majesty present with us, not, it is true, in a manner visible to mortal eye, but hidden by a miracle of power, under the veil of the sacred mysteries. How admirably does not this Sacrament, also, display to us the infinite love of Jesus Christ to man! It became the goodness of the Saviour not to withdraw from us that nature which he assumed for our sake, but to desire, as far as possible, to dwell permanently amongst us, at all times strictly verifying the words: " My delight is to be with the children of men."
Here the pastor will also explain to the faithful, that in this Sacrament are contained not only the true body of Christ, and all the constituents of a true body, but also Christ whole and entire - that the word Christ designates the man-God, that is to say, one Person in whom are united the divine and human natures - that the holy Eucharist, therefore, contains both, and whatever is included in the idea of both, the divinity and humanity whole and entire, the soul, the body and blood of Christ with all their component parts all of which faith teaches us are contained in the Sacrament. In heaven the whole humanity is united to the divinity in one hypostasis, or person, and it were impious, therefore, to suppose that the body of Christ, which is contain ed in the Sacrament, is separated from his divinity.
The pastor, however, will not fail to observe, that in the Sacrament all are not contained after the same manner, or by the same efficacy: some things, we say, the efficacy of consecration accomplishes; for as the words of consecration effectuate what they signify, sacred writers usually say, that whatever the form expresses, is contained in the Sacrament by virtue of the Sacrament; and hence, could we suppose any one thing to be entirely separated from the rest, the Sacrament, in their opinion, would be found to contain solely what the form expresses. But, some things are contained in the Sacrament, because united to those which are expressed in the form; for instance, the words " This is my body," which comprise the form used to consecrate the bread, signify the body of the Lord, and hence, the body of the Lord is contained in the Eucharist, by virtue of the Sacrament. As, however, to the body are united his blood, his soul, his divinity, they too must be found to coexist in the Sacrament; not, however, by virtue of the consecration, but by virtue of the union that subsists between them and his body; and this theologians express by the word " concomitance." Hence it is clear that Christ, whole and entire, is contained in the Sacrament; for when two things are actually united, where one is, the other must also be. Hence it also follows, that Christ, whole and entire, is contained under either species, so that as under the species of bread, are contained not only the body, but also the blood and Christ entire, so in like manner, under the species of wine are contained not only the blood, but also the body and Christ entire. These are matters on which the faithful cannot entertain a doubt. Wisely, however, was it ordained that two distinct consecrations should take place: they represent in a more lively manner, the passion of our Lord, in which his blood was separated from his body; and hence, in the form of consecration we commemorate the effusion of his blood. The sacrament is to be used by us as the food and nourishment of our souls; and it was most accordant with this its use, that it should be instituted as meat and drink, which obviously constitute the proper food of man.
The pastor will also inform the faithful, that Christ, whole and entire, is contained not only under either species, but also in each particle of either species: "Each," says St. Augustine, " receives Christ the Lord entire in each particle: he is not diminished by being given to many, but gives himself whole and entire to each." This is also an obvious inference from the narrative of the Evangelists: it is not to be supposed that the bread used at the Last Supper was consecrated by our Lord in separate parts, applying the form particularly to each, but that all the sacramental bread then used, was consecrated in sufficient quantity to be distributed amongst the Apostles, at the same time and with the same form. That the consecration of the chalice also, was performed in the same manner, is obvious from these words of the Saviour: " Take and divide it amongst you."
What has hitherto been said is intended to enable the pastor to show, that the body and blood of Christ are really and truly contained in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. That the substance of the bread and wine does not continue to exist in the Sacrament after consecration, is the next subject of instruction which is to engage his attention; a truth which, although well calculated to excite our profound admiration, is yet a necessary consequence from what has been already established. If, after consecration, the body of Christ is really and truly present under the species of bread and wine, not having been there before, it must have become so by change of place - by creation - or by transubstantiation. It cannot be rendered present by change of place, because it would then cease to be in heaven, for whatever is moved must necessarily cease to occupy the place from which it is moved. Still less can we suppose it to be rendered present by creation, an idea which the mind instantly rejects. In order that the body of our Lord be present in the Sacrament, it remains, therefore, that it be rendered present by transubstantiation, and of course, that the substance of the bread entirely cease to exist. Hence our predecessors in the faith, the Fathers of the general Council of Lateran, and of Florence, confirmed by solemn decrees the truth of this Article. In the Council of Trent it was still more fully denned in these words: " If any one shall say, that in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist the substance of the bread and wine remains, together with the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema." The doctrine thus defined is a natural inference from the words of Scripture. When instituting this Sacrament, our Lord himself said: " this is my body:" the word "this," expresses the entire substance of the thing present; and therefore, if the substance of the bread remained, our Lord could not have said: " This is my body." In St. John he also says: "The bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world:" the bread which he promises to give, he here declares to be " his flesh." A little after he adds: " Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you:" and again, " My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed." When, there fore, in terms so clear and so explicit, he thus calls his flesh " meat indeed," and his blood " drink indeed," he gives us sufficiently to understand, that the substance of the bread and wine - no longer exists in the Sacrament. Whoever turns over the Fro pages of the Holy Fathers will easily perceive, that, on the doctrine of Transubstantiation, they have been at all times unanimous. St. Ambrose says: " You say, perhaps, this bread is them. no other than what is used for common food: before consecration it is indeed bread; but, no sooner are the words of consecration pronounced, than from bread it becomes the flesh of Christ." To prove this position more clearly, he elucidates it by a variety of comparisons and examples. In another place, when explaining these words of the Psalmist: "Whatsoever the Lord pleased he hath done in heaven and on earth," he says: " Although the species of bread and wine are visible, yet faith tells us that after consecration, the body and blood of Christ are alone there." Explaining the same doctrine almost in the same words, St. Hilary says, that although externally it appear bread and wine, yet in reality it is the body and blood of the Lord.
