The Sacraments · The Holy Eucharist (3 of 4)
Here the pastor will not omit to observe to the faithful, that we should not at all be surprised, if even after consecration, the Eucharist is sometimes called bread: it is so called because it has the appearance and still retains the natural quality of bread, which is to support and nourish the body. That such phraseology is in perfect accordance with the style of the Holy Scriptures, which call things by what they appear to be, is evident from the words of Genesis, which say, that Abraham saw three men, when, in reality, he saw three angels; and the two angels also, who appeared to the Apostles after the ascension of our Lord, are, called not angels, but men.
To explain this mystery in a proper manner is extremely difficult. On the manner of this admirable conversion, the pastor, however, will endeavour to instruct those who are more advanced in the knowledge and contemplation of divine things: those who are yet weak may, it were to be apprehended, be overwhelmed by its greatness. This conversion, then, is so effectuated that the whole substance of the bread and wine is changed by the power of God, into the whole substance of the body of Christ, and the whole substance of the wine, into the whole substance of his blood, and this, without any change in our Lord himself: he is neither begotten, nor changed, nor in creased, but remains entirely and substantially the same. This sublime mystery St. Ambrose thus declares: " You see how efficacious are the words of Christ; if, then, the word of the Lord Jesus is so powerful as to summon creation into existence, shall it not require a less exercise of power, to make that sub sist, which already has existence, and to change it into another thing?" Many other Fathers, whose authority is too grave to be questioned, have written to the same effect: "We faithfully confess," says St. Augustine, " that before consecration it is bread and wine, the produce of nature; but after consecration it is the body and blood of Christ, consecrated by the blessing." " The body," says Damascene, "is truly united to the divinity, the body assumed of the virgin; not that the body thus assumed descends from heaven, but that the bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ." This admirable change, as the Council of Trent teaches, the Catholic Church most appropriately expresses by the word " transubstantiation." When, in the natural order, the form of a being is changed, that change inay be properly termed "a transformation;" in like manner, when, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the whole substance of one thing passes into the whole substance of another, the change our predecessors in the faith wisely and appropriately called " transubstantiation." But according to the admonition so frequently repeated by the Holy Fathers, the faithful are to be admonished against the danger ol gratifying a prurient curiosity, by searching into the manner in which this change is effected. It mocks the powers of conception, nor can we find any example of it in natural transmutations, nor even in the wide range of creation. The change itself is the object not of our comprehension, but of our humble faith; and the manner of that change forbids the temerity of a too curious inquiry.
The same salutary caution should also be observed by the pastor, with regard to the mysterious manner in which the body of our Lord is contained whole and entire under the least particle of the bread. Such inscrutable mysteries should scarcely ever become matter of disquisition. Should Christian charity, however, require a departure from this salutary rule, the pastor will recollect first to prepare and fortify his hearers, by reminding them, that "no word shall be impossible with God."
The pastor will next teach, that our Lord is not in the Sacrament as in a place: place regards things, only inasmuch as they have magnitude; and we do not say that Christ is in the Sacrament inasmuch as he is great or small, terms which belong to quantity, but inasmuch as he is a substance. The substance of the bread is changed into the substance of Christ, not into magnitude or quantity; and substance, it will be acknowledged, is contained in a small as well as in a large space. The substance of air, for instance, whether in a large or in a small quantity, and that of water whether confined in a vessel, or flowing in a river, must necessarily be the same. As, then, the body of our Lord succeeds to the substance of the bread, we must confess it to be in the Sacrament after the same manner, as the bread was before consecration: whether the substance of the bread was present in greater or less quantity is a matter of entire indifference.
We now come to the third effect produced by the words of consecration, the existence of the species of bread and wine in the Sacrament without a subject, an effect as stupendous as it is admirable. What has been said in explanation of the two preceding points, must facilitate the exposition of this mysterious truth. We have already proved that the body and blood of our Lord are really and truly contained in the Sacrament, to the entire exclusion of the substance of the bread and wine: the accidents cannot inhere in the body and blood of Christ: they must, therefore, contrary to the physical laws, subsist of them selves, inhering in no subject. This has been, at all times, the doctrine of the Catholic Church; and the same authorities by which we have already proved, that the substance of the bread and wine ceases to exist in the Eucharist, go to establish its truth. But it becomes the piety of the faithful, omitting subtle disquisitions, to revere and adore in the simplicity of faith, the majesty of this august Sacrament; and with sentiments of gratitude and admiration, to recognise the wisdom of God in the institution of the holy mysteries, under the species of bread and wine. To eat human flesh, or to drink human blood, is most revolting to human nature, and, therefore, has God in his infinite wisdom, established the administration of the body and blood of Christ, under the forms of bread and wine, the ordinary and agreeable food of man. From its administration under these forms, also flow two other important advantages: it obviates the calumnious reproaches of the unbeliever, to which a manducation of the body and blood of our Lord, under human form, must be exposed; whilst, by receiving him under a form in which he is impervious to the senses, our faith is augmented, "which," as St. Gregory observes, "has no merit in those things, which fall under the jurisdiction of reason." But what has been hitherto said on this subject, demands much prudent precaution in its exposition; and in this the pastor will be guided by the capacity of his hearers, by times and circumstances.
With regard to the salutary effects of this Sacrament, these, because most necessary to be known by all, the pastor will ex pound to all, indiscriminately and without reserve. What we have said at such length on this subject, is to be made known to the faithful, principally with a view to make them sensible of the advantages which flow from its participation, advantages too numerous and important to be expressed in words, and amongst which the pastor must be content to select one or two points for explanation, to show the superabundant graces with which the holy mysteries abound. To this end it will be found conducive, to premise an explanation of the nature and efficacy of the other Sacraments, and then compare the Eucharist to the living fountain, the other Sacraments to so many rivulets. With great truth is the Holy Eucharist called the fountain of all grace, containing as it does, after an admirable manner, the source of all gifts and graces, the author of all the Sacraments, Christ our Lord, from whom as from their source, they derive all their goodness and perfection. This comparison, therefore, serves to show how great are the treasures of grace, which are derived from this Sacrament.
It will also be found expedient to -consider attentively the nature of bread and wine, the symbols of this sacrament: what bread and wine are to the body, the Eucharist is, in a superior order, to the health and joy of the soul. It is not, like bread and wine, changed into our substance; but, in some measure, changes us into its own nature, and to it we may apply these words of St. Augustine: " I am the food of the grown; grow and thou shalt partake of this food; nor shall thou change me into thee, as thou dost thy corporal food, but thou shalt be changed into me." If then "grace and truth come by Jesus Christ," these spiritual treasures must be poured into that soul, which receives with purity and holiness, him who says of him self: " He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, abideth in me and I in him." Those who piously and religiously receive this Sacrament, receive, no doubt, the Son of God into their souls, and are united, as living members, to his body; for it is written: "He that eateth me, the same also shall live by me;" and also: " The bread that I will give is my flesh, for the life of the world." Explaining these words of the Saviour, St. Cyril says: "The Eternal Word, uniting him self to his own flesh, imparted to it a vivifying power; it be came him, therefore, to unite himself to us after a wonderful manner, through his sacred flesh and precious blood, which we receive in the bread and wine, consecrated by his vivifying benediction."
But when it is said, that this Sacrament imparts grace, it is not intended to mean that, to receive this Sacrament with advantage, it is unnecessary to be previously in the state of grace, Natural food can be of no use to a person who is already dead, and in like manner the sacred mysteries can avail him nothing, who lives not in Spirit. Hence this Sacrament has been instituted under the forms of bread and wine, to signify, that the object of its institution is not to recall to life a dead soul, but to preserve life to a living one. We say that this Sacrament imparts grace, because even the first grace, which all should have before they presume to approach this Sacrament, lest they " eat and drink judgment to themselves," is given to none unless they desire to receive the Holy Eucharist, which is the end of all the Sacraments, the symbol of ecclesiastical unity, to which he who does not belong, cannot receive divine grace. Again, as the body is not only supported but increased by natural food, from which we derive new pleasure every day; so also the life of the soul is not only sustained but invigorated by feasting on the Eucharistic banquet, which imparts to it an increasing zest for heavenly things. With strictest truth and propriety, therefore, do we say that this Sacrament, which may be well compared to manna, "having in it all that is delicious, and the sweetness of every taste," imparts grace to the soul.
That the Holy Eucharist remits lighter offences, or, as they are commonly called, venial sins, cannot be matter of doubt. whatever losses the soul sustains by falling into some slight offences, through the violence of passion, these the Eucharist, which cancels lesser sins, repairs in the same manner, not to depart from the illustration already adduced, that natural food, as we know from experience, gradually repairs the daily waste caused by the vital heat of the system. Of this heavenly Sacrament justly, therefore, has St. Ambrose said: "This daily bread is taken as a remedy for daily infirmity." This, however, is to be understood of venial imperfections only.
The Holy Eucharist is also an antidote against the contagion of sin, and a shield against the violent assaults of temptation. It is, as it were, a heavenly medicine, which secures the soul contagion against the easy approach of virulent and deadly infection. St. Cyprian records that when, in the early ages of the Church, Christians were hurried in multitudes by tyrants, to torments and death, because they professed the name of Christ, they received from the hand of the bishop, the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord, lest, perhaps overcome by excess of torments, they should yield in the saving conflict. It also represses the licentious desires of the flesh, and keeps them in due subjection to the spirit: in proportion as it inflames the soul with the fire of charity, in the same proportion does it necessarily extinguish the fire of concupiscence. Finally, to narrow within the compass of a few words all the advantages and blessings which emanate from this Sacrament, the Holy Eucharist facilitates to an extraordinary degree, the attainment of eternal life: "He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood," says the Redeemer, " hath everlasting life, and I will raise him up on the last day." The grace which it imparts, brings peace and tranquillity to the soul; and when the hour shall have arrived in which he is to take his departure from this mortal life, like another Elias, who in the strength of his miraculous repast, walked to Horeb the mount of God, 6 the Christian, invigorated by the strengthening influence of this heavenly food, shall wing his way to the mansions of everlasting glory and never-ending bliss. All these important particulars the pastor will be able fully to expound to the faithful, if he but dilate on the sixth chapter of St. John, in which are developed the manifold effects of this Sacrament; or if, glancing through the life and actions of our Lord, he shows that if they who received him beneath their roof during his mortal life, or were restored to health by touching his vesture, or even the hem of his garment, were justly deemed happy, how much more happy we, into whose souls, resplendent as he is with unfading glory, he, disdains not to enter, to heal all our spiritual wounds, to enrich us with his choicest gifts, and to unite us to himself!
But to excite the faithful to emulate better gifts, the pastor will also point out who they are who derive these inestimable blessings from a participation of the holy mysteries, reminding them that Christians may communicate differently and with different effects. Hence our predecessors in the faith, as we read in the Council of Trent, distinguished three classes of communicants Some receive the Sacrament only: such are those sinners who dread not to approach the holy mysteries with polluted lips and depraved hearts, who, as the Apostle says, " eat and drink unworthily." Of this class of communicants St. Augustine says: " He who dwells not in Christ, and in whom Christ does not dwell, most certainly eats not spiritually his flesh, although carnally and visibly he press with his teeth the Sacrament of his flesh and blood." Not only, therefore, do those who receive the Holy Eucharist with these dispositions, obtain no fruit from its participation, but, as the Apostle says, " they eat and drink judgment to themselves." Others are said to receive the Holy Eucharist in spirit only: they are those who, inflamed with a lively " faith that worketh by charity," participate in desire, of this celestial food, from which they receive, if not the entire, at least very considerable fruit. Lastly, there are some who receive the Holy Eucharist both spiritually and sacramentally, those who, according to the advice of the Apostle, having first proved themselves, approach this divine banquet, adorned with the nuptial garment, and derive from it all those superabundant graces which we have already mentioned. Those, therefore, who, having it in their power to receive, with due preparation, the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, are yet satisfied with a spiritual communion only, manifestly deprive themselves of a heavenly treasure of inestimable value. We now come to point out the manner in which the faithful should be previously prepared for sacramental communion. To demonstrate the necessity of this previous preparation, the example or the Saviour is to be proposed to the faithful. Before he gave to his Apostles the Sacrament of his body and blood, although they were already clean, he washed their feet, to declare that we must use extreme diligence to bring with us to its participation the greatest integrity and innocence of soul. In the next place, the faithful are to understand that as he who approaches thus prepared and disposed, is adorned with the most ample gifts of heavenly grace, so on the contrary, he who approaches without this preparation and without these dispositions, not only derives from it no advantage, but plunges his own soul into the most unutterable misery. It is the property of the best and most salutary medicine, if seasonably applied, to be productive of the greatest benefit, but if unseasonably, to prove most pernicious and destructive. It cannot, therefore, excite our surprise, that the great and exalted gifts of God, when received into a soul properly predisposed, are of the greatest assistance towards the attainment of salvation; whilst to those who receive them without these necessary dispositions, they bring with them eternal death. Of this, the Ark of the Lord affords a convincing illustration: the people of Israel possessed nothing more precious; it was to them the source of innumerable blessings from God; but, when borne off by the Philistines, it brought on them a most destructive plague and the heaviest calamities, heightened, as they were, by eternal dis grace. Food when received into a healthy stomach nourishes and supports the body; but the same food, when received into a stomach replete with peccant humours, generates malignant disease.
The first preparation, then, which the faithful should make, is to distinguish table from table, this sacred table from profane tables, this celestial bread from common bread. This we do when we firmly believe, that the Eucharist really and truly contains the body and blood of the Lord, of him whom the angels adore in heaven, "at whose nod the pillars of heaven fear and tremble," of whose glory the heavens and the earth are full. This is to discern the body of the Lord, in accordance with the admonition of the Apostle, venerating rather, the greatness of the mystery, than too curiously investigating its truth by idle
Second, disquisjtion. Another very necessary preparation is to ask ourselves, if we are at peace with, if we sincerely and from the heart love our neighbour. " If, therefore, thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there rememberest, that thy brother hath aught against thee, leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift." We should in the next place, carefully examine our consciences, lest perhaps they be defiled by mortal guilt, which sincere repentance alone can efface. This severe scrutiny is necessary in order to cleanse the soul from its defilement, by applying to it the salutary medicine of contrition and confession. The Council of Trent has defined, that no one conscious of mortal sin, and having an opportunity of recurring to a confessor, however contrite he may deem himself, is to approach the Holy Eucharist, until he has been purified by sacramental confession. We should also reflect in the silence of our own hearts, how unworthy we are that God should bestow on us this divine gift, and with the Centurion, of whom our Lord declared, that he found not " so great faith in Israel," we should exclaim: " Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof." We should also put the question to ourselves, whether we can truly say with Peter: " Lord, thou knowest that I love thee;" and should recollect, that he who sat down at the marriage feast without a nuptial garment, was cast into exterior darkness, and condemned to eternal torments.
Our preparation should not, however, be confined to the soul: it should also extend to the body. We are to approach the Holy Eucharist fasting, having neither eaten nor drunk, at least from the preceding midnight. The dignity of so great a Sacrament also demands, that married persons abstain from the marriage-debt, for some days previous to communion, an observance recommended by the example of David, who, when about to receive the show-bread from the hands of the priest, declared, that he and his servants had been " clean from women for three days." These particulars contain a summary of the principal things to be observed by the faithful, preparatory to receiving the sacred mysteries; and to these heads may be reduced, whatever other preparations piety will suggest to the devout communicant.
But that none may be deterred by the difficulty of the prepa- ration from approaching the Holy Eucharist, the faithful are frequently to be reminded that they are all bound to receive this Sacrament; and that the Church has decreed that whoever neglects to approach the holy communion once a year, at Easter, subjects himself to sentence of excommunication. However, let not the faithful imagine that it is enough to receive the body of the Lord once a year only, in obedience to the decree of the Church: they should approach oftener; but whether monthly, weekly, or daily, cannot be decided by any fixed universal rule. St. Augustine, however, lays down a most certain rule applicable to all "Live," says he, " in such a manner as to be able to receive every day." It will therefore be the duty of the pastor frequently to admonish the faithful, that as they deem it necessary to afford daily nutriment to the body, they should also feel solicitous to feed and nourish the soul every day with this heavenly food. The soul stands not less in need of spiritual, than the body of corporal food. Here it will be found most useful to recapitulate the inestimable advantages which, as we have already shown, flow from sacramental communion, and the manna also which was a figure of this Sacrament, and of which the Israelites had occasion to partake every day, may be used as a further illustration. The Fathers, who earnestly recommended the frequent participation of this Sacrament, may be adduced as additional authority to enforce the necessity of frequent communion; and the words, " thou sinnest daily, receive daily," convey the sentiments not alone of St. Augustine, but of all the Fathers who have written on the subject.
