The Sacraments · The Holy Eucharist (4 of 4)
That there was a time when the faithful approached the Holy Communion every day, we learn from the Acts of the Apostles. All who then professed the faith of Christ, burned with such pure and ardent charity, that devoting themselves, as they did unceasingly, to prayer and other works of piety, they were found prepared to communicate daily. This devout practice, which seems to have been interrupted for a time, was again partially revived by Pope Anacletus, a most holy martyr, who commanded, that all the ministers who assisted at the holy sacrifice, should communicate, an ordinance, as the Pontiff declares, of Apostolic institution. It was also for a long time the practice of the Church, that, as soon as the sacrifice was ended, the priest, turning to the congregation, invited the faithful to the holy table in these words: " Come, brethren, and receive the communion;" and those who were prepared, advanced to receive the holy mysteries with hearts animated by the most fervent devotion. But subsequently, when charity and devotion declined amongst Christians, and the faithful very seldom approached the holy communion, it was decreed by Pope Fabian, that all should communicate thrice every year, at Christmas, at Easter, and at Pentecost, a decree which was afterwards con firmed by many Councils, particularly by the first of Agath. Such, at length, was the decay of piety, that not only was this holy and salutary practice unobserved, but communion was deferred for years. The Council of Lateran, therefore, decreed that all the faithful should communicate, at least, once a year, at Easter, and that the omission should be chastised by exclusion from the society of the faithful. But although this law, sanctioned, as it is, by the authority of God and of his Church, regards all the faithful, the pastor, however, will teach that it does not extend to persons who have not arrived at the years of discretion, because they are incapable of discerning the Holy Eucharist from common food, and cannot bring with them to this Sacrament, the piety and devotion which it demands. To extend the precept to them would appear inconsistent with the institution of this Sacrament by our Lord: "Take," says he, " and eat," words which cannot apply to infants, who are evidently incapable of taking and eating. In some places, it is true, an ancient practice prevailed of giving the Holy Eucharist even to infants; but, for the reasons already assigned, and for other reasons most consonant to Christian piety, this practice has been long discontinued by authority of the same Church. With regard to the age at which children should be admitted to communion, this the parents and confessor can best determine: to them it belongs to ascertain whether the children have acquired a competent knowledge of this admirable Sacrament, and desire to taste this bread of angels.
From persons labouring under actual insanity the Sacrament should also be withheld. However, according to the decree of the Council of Carthage, it may be administered to them at the close of life, provided they had evinced, previously to their insanity, a sincerely pious desire of being admitted to its participation, and if no danger arising from the state of the stomach or other inconvenience or indignity, is to be apprehended.
As to the rite to be observed in the administration of this Sacrament, the pastor will teach that the law of the Church interdiets its administration under both kinds to any but to the officiating priest, unless by special permission of the Church. Christ, it is true, as has been explained by the Council of Trent, instituted and administered to his Apostles, at his last supper, this great Sacrament under both kinds; but it does not follow of necessity, that by doing so he established a law rendering its administration to the faithful under both species imperative. Speaking of this sacrament he himself frequently mentions it under one kind only: " If," says he, " any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of the world," and, " He that eateth this bread shall live for ever." The Church, no doubt, was influenced by numerous and cogent reasons, not only to approve but confirm by solemn decree, the general practice of communicating under one species. In the first place, the greatest caution was necessary to avoid accident or indignity, which must become almost inevitable, if the chalice were administered in a crowded assemblage. In the next place, the Holy Eucharist should be at all times in readiness for the sick, and if the species of wine remained long unconsumed, it were to be apprehended that it may become vapid. Besides, there are many who cannot bear the taste or smell of wine; lest, therefore, what is intended for the nutriment of the soul should prove noxious to the health of the body, the Church, in her wisdom, has sanctioned its administration under the species of bread alone. We may also observe that in many places wine is extremely scarce, nor can it be brought from distant countries without incurring very heavy expense, and encountering very tedious and difficult journeys. Finally, a circumstance which principally influenced the Church in establishing this practice, means were to be devised to crush the heresy which denied that Christ, whole and entire, is contained under either species, and asserted that the body is contained under the species of bread without the blood, and the blood under the species of wine without the body. This object was attained by communion under the species of bread alone, which places, as it were, sensibly before our eyes, the truth of the Catholic faith. Those who have writ ten expressly on this subject, will, if it appear necessary, furnish the pastor with additional reasons for the practice of the Catholic Church in the administration of the Holy Eucharist. To omit nothing doctrinal on so important a subject, we now come to speak of the minister of the sacrament, a point, however, on which scarcely any one is ignorant. The pastor then will teach, that to priests alone has been given power to consecrate and administer the Holy Eucharist. That the unvarying practice of the Church has also been, that the faithful receive the Sacrament from the hand of the priest, and that the priest communicate himself, has been explained by the Council of Trent;" and the same holy Council has shown that this practice is always to be scrupulously adhered to, stamped, as it is, with the authoritative impress of Apostolic tradition, and sanctioned by the illustrious example of our Lord himself, who, with his own hands, consecrated and gave to his disciples, his most sacred body.
To consult as much as possible, for the dignity of this so august a Sacrament, not only is its administration confined exclusively to the priestly order, but the Church has also, by an express law, prohibited any but those who are consecrated to religion, unless in case of necessity, to touch the sacred vessels, tho linen, or other immediate necessaries for consecration. Priests and people may hence learn what piety and holiness they should possess who consecrate, administer, or receive the Holy of Holies. The Eucharist, however, as was observed with regard to the other Sacraments, whether administered by holy or unholy hands, is equally valid. It is of faith that the efficacy of the Sacraments does not depend on *he merit of the minister, but on the virtue and power of our Lord Jesus Christ.
With regard to the Eucharist as a Sacrament, these are the principal points which demanded explanation. Its nature as a sacrifice we now come to explain, that pastors may know what are the principal instructions to be communicated to the faithful regarding this mystery, on Sundays and holidays, in compliance with the decree of the Council of Trent. Not only is this Sacrament a treasure of heavenly riches, which if we turn to good account will purchase for us the favour and friendship of heaven; but it also possesses the peculiar and extraordinary value, that in it we are enabled to make some suitable return to God for the inestimable benefits bestowed on us by his bounty. If duly and legitimately offered, this victim is most grateful and most acceptable to God. If the sacrifices of the old law, of which it is written: "Sacrifices and oblations thou wouldst not:" and also, " If thou hadst desired sacrifice, I would, in deed, have given it: with burnt-offering thou wilt not be delighted," were so acceptable in his sight that, as the Scripture testifies, from them " he smelt a sweet savour," that is to say, they were grateful and acceptable to him; what have we not to hope from the efficacy of a sacrifice in which is immolated and offered no less a victim than he, of whom a voice from heaven twice proclaimed: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." This mystery, therefore, the pastor will carefully explain to the people, that when assembled at its celebration, they may learn to make it the subject of attentive and devout meditation.
He will teach, in the first place, that the Eucharist was instituted by our Lord for two great purposes, to be the celestial food of the soul, preserving and supporting spiritual life, and to give to the Church a perpetual sacrifice, by which sin may be expiated, and our heavenly Father, whom our crimes have often grievously offended, may be turned from wrath to mercy, from the severity of just vengeance to the exercise of benignant clemency. Of this the paschal lamb, which was offered and eaten by the Israelites as a sacrament and sacrifice, was a lively figure. Nor could our divine Lord, when about to offer himself to his eternal Father on the altar of the cross, have given a more illustrious proof of his unbounded love for us, than by bequeathing to us a visible sacrifice, by which the bloody sacrifice, which, a little after, was to be offered once on the cross, was to be renewed, and its memory celebrated daily throughout the universal Church even to the consummation of time, to the great advantage of her children.
The difference between the Eucharist as a sacrament and sacrifice is very great, and is two-fold: as a sacrament it is perfected by consecration, as a sacrifice all its efficacy consists in its oblation. When deposited in a tabernacle, or borne to the sick, it is, therefore, a sacrament, not a sacrifice. As a sacrament, it is also to the worthy receiver a source of merit, and brings with it all those advantages which we have already mentioned; as a sacrifice it is not only a source of merit, but also of satisfaction. As, in his passion, our Lord merited and satisfied for us, so in the oblation of this sacrifice, which is a bond of Christian unity, Christians merit the fruit of his passion, and satisfy for sin.
With regard to the institution of this sacrifice, the Council of Trent has obviated all doubt on the subject, by declaring that it was instituted by our Lord at his last supper, whilst it destituted, nounces anathema against all who assert that in it is not offered to God a true and proper sacrifice; or that to offer means nothing more than that Christ gives himself to be our spiritual food. That sacrifice is due to God alone, the holy Council also states in the clearest terms. The solemn sacrifice of the Mass is, it is true, sometimes offered to honour the memory of the Saints; but it is never offered to them, but to Him alone who has crowned them with unfading glory. Never does the officiating minister say: " I offer sacrifice to thee, Peter, or to thee, Paul;" but whilst he offers sacrifice to God alone, he renders him thanks for the signal victories won by the martyrs, and implores their patronage, " that they whose memory we celebrate on earth, may vouchsafe to intercede for us in heaven." The doctrine of the Catholic Church with regard to this sacrifice, she received from our Lord, when at his last supper, committing to his Apostles the sacred mysteries, he said: " This do, for a commemoration of me." He then, as the holy Synod has defined, ordained them priests, and commanded them and their successors in the ministry, to immolate and offer in sacrifice his precious body and blood. Of this the words of the Apostle to the Corinthians also afford sufficient evidence: "You cannot," says he, "drink the chalice of the Lord, and the chalice of devils: you cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord, and of the table of devils." As then, by the " table of devils," we understand the altar upon which sacrifice was offered to them; so by "the table of the Lord," to bring the words of the Apostle to an apposite conclusion, should be understood the altar on which sacrifice was offered to the Lord.
Should we look for figures and prophecies of this sacrifice in the Old Testament, we find, in the first place, that its institution was clearly foretold by Malachy in these words: "From the rising of the sun, even to the going down thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is offered to my name a clean oblation: for my name is great among the Gentiles, saith the Lord of hosts." This saving victim was also foretold, as well before as after the promulgation of the Mosaic law, by a variety of sacrifices; for this alone, as the perfection and completion of all, comprises all the advantages which were typified by the other sacrifices. In none of the sacrifices of the old law, however, do we discover a more lively image of the Eucharistic sacrifice than in that of Melchisedech. Our Lord himself, at his last Supper, offered to his Eternal father his precious body and blood under the appearances of bread and wine, at the same time declaring himself, " a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech."
We, therefore, confess that the sacrifice of the Mass is one and the same sacrifice with that of the cross: the victim is one and the same, Christ Jesus, who offered himself, once only, a bloody sacrifice on the altar of the cross. The bloody and unbloody victim is still one and the same, and the oblation of the cross is daily renewed in the eucharistic sacrifice, in obedience to the command of our Lord: " This do, for a commemoration of me." The priest is also the same, Christ our Lord: the ministers who offer this sacrifice, consecrate the holy mysteries not in their own but in the person of Christ. This the words of consecration declare: the priest does not say: " This is the body of Christ," but, " This is my body;" and thus invested with the character of Christ, he changes the substance of the bread and wine into the substance of his real body and blood. That the holy sacrifice of the Mass, therefore, is not only a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, or a commemoration of the sacrifice of the cross; but also a sacrifice of propitiation, by which God is appeased and rendered propitious, the pastor will teach as a dogma defined by the unerring authority of a general Council of the Church. If, therefore, with pure hearts and a lively faith, and with a sincere sorrow for past transgressions, we immolate and offer in sacrifice this most holy victim, we shall, no doubt, receive from the Lord " mercy and grace in seasonable aid." So acceptable to God is the sweet odour of this sacrifice, that through its oblation he pardons our sins, bestowing on us the gifts of grace and of repentance. This is the solemn prayer of the Church: as often as the commemoration of this victim is celebrated, so often is the work of our salvation promoted, and the plenteous fruits cf that bloody victim flow in upon us abundantly, through this unbloody sacrifice.
The pastor will also teach, that such is the efficacy of this sacrifice, that its benefits extend not only to the celebrant and communicant, but also to all the faithful whether living or numbered amongst those who have died in the Lord, but whose sins have not yet been fully expiated. According to apostolic tradition the most authentic, it is not less available when offered for them than when offered in atonement for the sins, in alleviation of the punishments, the satisfactions, the calamities, or for the relief of the necessities, of the living. It is hence easy to perceive, that the mass, whenever and wherever offered, because conducive to the common interests and salvation of all, is to be considered common to all the faithful.
This great sacrifice is celebrated with many solemn rites and ceremonies: of these rites and ceremonies let none be deemed useless or superfluous: all oh the contrary tend to display the majesty of this august sacrifice, and to excite the faithful, by the celebration of these saving mysteries, to the contemplation of the divine things which lie concealed in the eucharistic sacrifice. On these rites and ceremonies we shall not enter at large: they require a more lengthened exposition than is compatible with the nature of the present work; and the pastor has it in his power to consult on the subject, a variety of treatises composed by men eminent alike for piety and learning. What has been said will, with the divine assistance, be found sufficient to explain the principal things which regard the Holy Eucharist both as a sacrament and sacrifice.
