The Sacraments · Penance (1 of 4)
As the frailty and weakness of human nature are universally known and felt, no one can be ignorant of the paramount necessity of the Sacrament of Penance. If, therefore, in the exposition of the different matters of instruction, we are to measure the assiduity of the pastor by the weight and importance of the subject, we must come to the conclusion that, in expounding this Sacrament, he can never be sufficiently assiduous. Its exposition demands an accuracy superior to that of baptism. Baptism is administered but once, and cannot be repeated; penance may be administered and becomes necessary, as often as we may have sinned after baptism, according to the definition of the Fathers of Trent. " For those who fall into sin after baptism," say they, " the sacrament of penance is as necessary to salvation, as is baptism for those who have not been already baptized." On this subject the words of St. Jerome, which say, that penance is " a second plank," are universally known, and highly commended by all who have written on this Sacrament. As he who suffers shipwreck has no hope of safety, unless, perchance, he seize on some plank from the wreck; so he that suffers the shipwreck of baptismal innocence, unless he cling to the saving plank of penance, may abandon all hope of salvation. These instructions, however, are intended not only for the benefit of the pastor, but also for that of the faithful at large, whose attention they may awaken, lest they be found culpably negligent in a matter of all others the most important. Impressed with a just sense of the frailty of human nature, their first and most earnest desire should be, to advance, with the divine assistance, in the ways of God, flying sin of every sort. But should they, at any time, prove so unfortunate as to fall, then, looking at the infinite goodness of God, who like the good shepherd binds up and heals the wounds of his sheep, they should have immediate recourse to the sacrament of penance, that by its salutary and medicinal efficacy their wounds may be healed.
But to enter more immediately on the subject, and to avoid all error to which the ambiguity of the word may give rise, its different meanings are first to be explained. By penance some understand satisfaction; whilst others, who wander far from the doctrine of the Catholic faith, supposing penance to have no reference to the past, define it to be nothing more than newness of life. The pastor, therefore, will teach that the word (poanitentia) has a variety of meanings. In the first place, it is used to express a change of mind; as when, without taking into account the nature of the object, whether good or bad, what was before pleasing, is now become displeasing to us. In this sense the Apostle makes use of the word, when he applies it to those, " whose sorrow is according to the world, not according to God; and therefore, worketh not salvation, but death." In the second place, it is used to express that sorrow which the sinner conceives for sin, not however for sake of God, but for his own sake. A third meaning is when we experience interior sorrow of heart, or give ,exterior indication of such sorrow, not only on account of the sins which we have committed, but also for sake of God alone whom they offend. To all these sorts of sorrow the word (poenitentia) properly applies.
When the Sacred Scriptures say that God repented, the expression is evidently figurative: when we repent of any thing, we are anxious to change it; and thus, when God is said to change any thing, the Scriptures, accommodating their language to our ideas, say that he repents. Thus we read that " it repented him that he had made man," and also that it repented him to have made Saul king.
But an important distinction is to be made between these different significations of the word: to repent, in its first meaning, argues imperfection — in its second, the agitation of a disturbed mind — in the third, penance is a virtue and a sacrament, the sense in which it is here used.
We shall first treat of penance as a virtue, not only because it is the bounden duty of the pastor to form the faithful, with whose instruction he is charged, to the practice of every virtue; but also, because the acts which proceed from penance as a virtue, constitute the matter, as it were, of penance as a sacrament; and if ignorant of it in this latter sense, impossible not to be ignorant also of its efficacy as a sacrament. The faithful, there fore, are first to be admonished and exhorted to labour strenuously to attain this interior penance of the heart, which we call a virtue, and without which exterior penance can avail them very little. This virtue consists in turning to God sincerely and from the heart, and in hating and detesting our past transgressions, with a firm resolution of amendment of life, hoping to obtain pardon through the mercy of God. It is accompanied with a sincere sorrow, which is an agitation and affection of the mind, and is called by many a passion, and if accompanied with detestation, is, as it were, the companion of sin. It must, how ever, be preceded by faith, for without faith no man can turn to God. Faith, therefore, cannot on any account be called a part of penance. That this inward affection of the soul is, as we have already said, a virtue, the various precepts which enforce its necessity prove; for precepts regard those actions only, the performance of which implies virtue. Besides, to experience a sense of sorrow at the time, in the manner, and to the extent which are consonant to reason and religion, is no doubt an exercise of virtue: and this sorrow is regulated by the virtue of penance. Some conceive a sorrow which bears no proportion to the enormity of their crimes: " There are some," says Solomon, " who are glad when they have done evil;" whilst others, on the contrary, consign themselves to such morbid melancholy and to such a deluge of grief, as utterly to abandon all hope of salvation. Such perhaps was the condition of Cain when he exclaimed: " My iniquity is greater than that I may deserve pardon:" such certainly was the condition of Judas, who, " repenting," hanged himself in despair, and thus sacrificed soul and body. Penance, therefore, considered as a virtue, assists us in restraining within the bounds of moderation our sense of sorrow.
That penance is a virtue may also be inferred from the ends which the penitent proposes to himself. The first is to destroy sin and efface from the soul its every spot and stain; the second, to make satisfaction to God for the sins which he has committed, and this is an act of justice towards God. Be tween God and man, it is true, no relation of strict justice can exist, so great is the distance between the Creator and the creature; yet between both there is evidently a sort of justice, such as exists between a father and his children, be tween a master and his servants. The third end is, to rein state himself in the favour and friendship of God whom he has offended, and whose hatred he has earned by the turpitude of sin. That penance is a virtue, these three ends which the penitent proposes to himself, sufficiently prove.
We must also point out the steps, by which we may ascend to this divine virtue. The mercy of God first prevents us and converts our hearts to him; this was the object of the prophet's prayer: " Convert us, O Lord! and we shall be converted." Illumined by this celestial light the soul next tends to God by faith: " He that cometh to God," says the Apostle, must believe that he is, and is a rewarder to them that seek him." A salutary fear of God's judgments follows, and the soul, contemplating the punishments that await sin, is recalled from the paths of vice: "As a woman with child," says Isaias, when she draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain and crieth out in her pangs; so are we become in thy presence, O Lord!" We are also animated with a hope of obtaining IV mercy from God, and cheered by this hope we resolve on a change of life. Lastly, our hearts are inflamed by charity; and V. hnce we conceive that filial fear which a dutiful and ingenuous child experiences towards a parent. Thus, dreading only to affend the majesty of God in any thing, we entirely abandon the ways of sin. These are, as it were, the steps by which we ascend to this most exalted virtue, a virtue altogether heavenly and divine, to which the Sacred Scriptures promise the inherience of heaven: " Do penance," says the Redeemer, " for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand:" " If," says the prophet Ezekiel, " the wicked do penance for all his sins which he hath committed, and keep all my commandments, and do judgment and justice, living he shall live, and shall not die:" " I desire not, saith the Lord, the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live;" words which are evidently understood of eternal life.
With regard to external penance, the pastor will teach that it is that which constitutes the sacrament of penance: it consists of certain sensible things significant of that which passes interiorly in the soul; and the faithful are to be informed, in the first place, why the Redeemer was pleased to give it a place among the Sacraments. His object was, no doubt, to remove, in a great measure, all uncertainty as to the pardon of sin promised by our Lord when he said: " If the wicked do penance for all his sins, which he hath committed, and keep all my commandments, and do judgment and justice, living he shall live, and shall not die." Pronouncing upon his own actions, every man has reason to question the accuracy of his own judgment, and hence, on the sincerity of interior penance the mind must be held in anxious suspense. To calm this our solicitude, the Redeemer instituted the sacrament of penance, in which we cherish a well founded hope, that our sins are forgiven us by the absolution of the priest, and the faith which we justly have in the efficacy of the Sacraments, has much influence in tranquillizing the troubled conscience and giving peace to the soul. The voice of the priest, who is legitimately constituted a minister for the remission of sins, is to be heard as that of Christ himself, who said to the lame man: " Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee."
Moreover, as salvation is unattainable but through Christ and the merits of his passion, the institution of this sacrament was in itself accordant to the views of divine wisdom, and pregnant with blessings to the Christian. Penance is the channel through which the blood of Christ flows into the soul, washes away the stains contracted after baptism, and calls forth from us the grateful acknowledgment, that to the Saviour alone we are indebted for the blessing of a reconciliation with God.
That penance is a sacrament the pastor will not find it difficult to establish: baptism is a sacrament because it washes away all, particularly original sin: penance also washes away all sins of thought or deed committed after baptism; on the same principle, therefore, penance is a sacrament. Again, and the argument is conclusive, a sacrament is the sign of a sacred thing, and what is done externally, by the priest and penitent, is a sign of what takes place, internally, in the soul: the penitent unequivocally expresses, by words and actions, that he has turned away from sin: the priest, too, by words and actions, gives us easily to understand, that the mercy of God is exercised in the remission of sin: this is, also, clearly evinced by these words of the Saviour: " I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatever sins you loose on earth, shall be loosed, also, in heaven." The absolution of the priest, which is expressed in words, seals, therefore, the remission of sins, which it accomplishes in the soul, and thus is penance in vested with all the necessary conditions of a sacrament, and is, therefore, truly a sacrament.
That penance is not only to be numbered amongst the sacraments, but also amongst the sacraments that may be repeated, the faithful are next to be taught. To Peter, asking if sin may be forgiven seven times, our Lord replies: " I say, not seven times, but seventy times seven." Whenever, therefore, the ministry of the priest is to be exercised towards those who seem to diffide in the infinite goodness and mercy of God, the zealous pastor will seek to inspire them with confidence, and to reanimate their hopes of obtaining the grace of God. This he will find it easy to accomplish by expounding the preceding words of our Lord, by adducing other texts of the same import, which are to be found numerously scattered throughout the Sacred Volume; and by adopting those reasons and arguments which are supplied by St. Chrysostome in his book " on the fallen," and by St. Ambrose in his treatise on penance.
As, then, amongst the sacraments there is none on which the faithful should be better informed, they are to be taught, that it differs from the other sacraments in this: the matter of the other sacraments is some production of nature or art; but the acts of the penitent, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, constitute, as has been defined by the Council of Trent, the matter as it were (quasi materia) of the sacrament of penance. They are called parts of penance., because required in the penitent, by divine institution for the integrity of the Sacrament and the full and entire remission of sin. When the holy synod says, that they are " the matter as it were," it is not because they are not the real matter, but because they are not, like water in baptism and chrism in confirmation, matter that may be applied externally. With regard to the opinion of some, who hold that the sins themselves constitute the matter of this sacrament, if well weighed, it will not be found to differ from what has been already laid down: we say that wood which is consumed by fire, is the matter of fire; and sins which are destroyed by penance, may also be called, with propriety, the matter of penance.
The form, also, because well calculated to excite the faithful, to receive with fervent devotion the grace of this sacrament, the pastor will not omit to explain. The words that compose the form are: " I ABSOLVE THEE," as may be inferred not only from these words of the Redeemer: " Whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven;" but also from the same doctrine of Jesus Christ, as recorded by the Apostles. That this is the perfect form of the sacrament of penance, the very nature of the form of a sacrament proves. The form of a sacrament signifies what the sacrament accomplishes: these words "I absolve thee" signify the accomplishment of absolution from sin through the instrumentality of this sacrament; they there fore constitute its form. Sins are, as it were, the chains by which the soul is fettered, and from the bondage of which it is "loosed" by the sacrament of penance. This form is not less true, when pronounced by the priest over him, who by means of perfect contrition, has already obtained the pardon of his sins. Perfect contrition, it is true, reconciles the sinner to God, but his justification is not to be ascribed to perfect contrition alone, independently of the desire which it includes of receiving the sacrament of penance. Many prayers accompany the form, not because they are deemed necessary, but in order to remove every obstacle, which the unworthiness of the penitent may op pose to the efficacy of the sacrament. Let then the sinner pour out his heart in fervent thanks to God, who has invested the ministers of his Church with such ample powers! Unlike the authority given to the priests of the Old Law, to declare the leper cleansed from his leprosy, the power with which the priests of the New Law are invested, is not simply to declare that sins are forgiven, but, as the ministers of God, really to absolve from sin; a power which God himself, the author and source of grace and justification, exercises through their ministry.
The rites used in the administration of this sacrament, also demand the serious attention of the faithful. They will enable them to form a more just estimate of the blessings which it be stows, recollecting that as servants, they are reconciled to the best of masters, or rather, as children, to the tenderest of fathers. They will, also, serve to place in a clearer point of view, the duty of those who desire, and desire every one should, to evince their grateful recollection of so inestimable a favour. Humbled in spirit, the sincere penitent casts himself down at the feet of the priest, to testify, by this his humble demeanour, that he acknowledges the necessity of eradicating pride, the root of all those enormities which he now deplores. In the minister of God, who sits in the tribunal of penance as his legitimate judge, he venerates the power and person of our Lord Jesus Christ; for in the administration of this, as in that of the other sacraments, the priest represents the character and dis charges the functions of Jesus Christ. Acknowledging him self deserving of the severest chastisements, and imploring the pardon of his guilt, the penitent next proceeds to the confession of his sins. To the antiquity of all these rites St. Denis bears the most authentic testimony.
To the faithful, however, nothing will be found more advantageous, nothing better calculated to animate them to frequent the sacrament of penance with alacrity, than the frequent exposition of the inestimable advantages which it confers. They will then see, that of penance it may be truly said: that " its root is bitter, but its fruit sweet." The great efficacy of penance is, therefore, that it restores us to the favour of God, and unites us to him in the closest bonds of friendship. From this reconciliation with God, the devout soul, who approaches the sacrament with deep sentiments of piety and religion, sometimes experiences the greatest tranquillity and peace of conscience, a tranquillity and peace accompanied with the sweetest spiritual joy. There is no sin, however grievous, no crime however enormous or however frequently repeated, which penance does not remit: " If," says the Almighty, by the mouth of his prophet, " the wicked do penance for all his sins, which he hath committed, and keep all my commandments, and do judgment and justice, living he shall live and shall not die; I will not remember all his iniquities which he hath done." " If," says St. John, " we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins;" and a little after he adds: " If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just; and he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world." If, therefore, we read in the pages of inspiration, of some who earnestly implored the mercy of God, but implored it in vain, it is because they did not repent sincerely and from their hearts. When we also meet in the Sacred Scriptures and in the writings of the Fathers, pas sages which seem to say, that some sins are irremissible, we are to understand such passages to mean, that it is very difficult to obtain the pardon of them. A disease may be said to be incurable, when the patient loathes the medicine that would accomplish his cure; and, in the same sense, some sins may be said to be irremissible, when the sinner rejects the grace of God, the proper medicine of salvation. To this effect St. Augustine says: " When, after having arrived at a knowledge of God, through the grace of Jesus Christ, any one opposes the fellow ship of the faith, and maliciously resists the grace of Jesus Christ, so great is the enormity of his crime, that, although his guilty conscience obliges him to acknowledge and declare his guilt, he cannot submit to the humiliation of imploring pardon."
To return to penance, to it belongs, in so special a manner, the efficacy of remitting actual guilt, that without its intervention we cannot obtain or even hope for pardon. It is written: " Unless you do penance, you shall all perish." These words of our Lord are to be understood of grievous and deadly sins, although, as St. Augustine observes, venial sins also require some penance: " If," says he, " without penance, venial sin could be remitted, the daily penance, performed for them by the Church, would be nugatory."
But as, on matters which, in any degree, affect moral actions, three it is not enough to convey instruction in general terms, the pastor will be careful to expound, severally, all those particulars which may give the faithful a knowledge of that penance, which is unto salvation. To this sacrament, then, it is peculiar that, besides matter and form, which are common to all the sacraments, it has, also, as we said before, what are called integral parts of penance, and these integral parts are contrition, confession, and satisfaction. " Penance," says St. Chrysostome, " induces the sinner cheerfully to undergo every rigour; his heart is pierced with contrition; his lips utter the confession of his guilt; and his actions breathe humility, and are accepted by God as a satisfaction." These component parts of penance are such as we say are necessary to constitute a whole. The human form, for instance, is composed of many members, of hands, of feet, of eyes, &c. of which, if any are wanting, man is justly deemed imperfect, and if not, perfect. Analogous to this, penance consists of the three parts which we have already enumerated; and although, as far as regards the nature of penance, contrition and confession are sufficient for justification, yet, if unaccompanied with satisfaction, something is still wanting to its integrity. So connected then are these parts one with the other, that contrition and a disposition to satisfaction precede confession, and contrition and confession precede satisfaction. Why these are integral parts of penance may be thus explained We sin against God by thought, word, and deed: when recurring to the power of the keys, we should, therefore, endeavour to appease his wrath, and obtain the pardon of our sins, by the very same means, by which we offended his supreme majesty. In further explanation we may also add, that penance is, as it were, a compensation for offences, which proceed from the free will of the person offending, and is appointed by the will of God, to whom the offence has been offered. On the part of the penitent, therefore, a willingness to make this compensation is required, and in this willingness chiefly consists contrition. The penitent must also submit himself to the judgment of the priest, who is the vicegerent of God, to enable him to award a punishment proportioned to his guilt; and, hence, are clearly understood the nature and necessity of confession and satisfaction.
