The Sacraments · Penance (2 of 4)
But as the faithful require instruction on the nature and efficacy of these parts of penance, we shall begin with contrition, a subject which demands to be explained with more than ordinary care; for as often as we call to mind our past transgressions, or offend God anew, so often should our hearts be pierced with contrition. By the Fathers of the Council of Trent, contrition is denned: " A sorrow and detestation of past sin, with a purpose of sinning no more." Speaking of the motion of the will to contrition, the Council, a little after, adds: " if joined with a confidence in the mercy of God, and an earnest desire of performing whatever is necessary to the proper reception of the Sacrament, it thus, at length, prepares us for the remission of sin." From this definition, therefore, the faithful will perceive that contrition does not simply consist in ceasing to sin, purposing to enter, or having actually entered, on a new life: it supposes, first of all, a hatred of sin, and a desire of atoning for past transgressions. This, the cries of the holy Fathers of antiquity, which are poured out in the pages of inspiration, sufficiently prove: "I have laboured in my groaning;" says David, "every night I will wash my bed;" and again, " The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping." " I will recount to thee all my years," says the prophet Isaias, "in the bitterness of my soul." These and many other expressions of the same import, were called forth by an intense hatred and a lively detestation of past transgressions.
But, although contrition is defined "a sorrow," the faithful are not thence to conclude, that this sorrow consists in sensible feeling: contrition is an act of the will, and as St. Augustine observes, sorrow is not penance, but the accompaniment of penance. By " sorrow " the Fathers of Trent understood a hatred and detestation of sin; because, in this sense, the Sa cred Scriptures frequently make use of the word: "How long," says David, " shall I take counsels in my soul, sorrow in my heart all the day?" and also because from contrition arises sorrow in the inferior part of the soul, which, in the language of the schools, is called the seat of concupiscence. With propriety, therefore, is contrition defined a " sorrow," because it produces sorrow, a sorrow so intense that in other days, peni tents, to express its intensity, changed their garments, a practice to which our Lord alludes when he says; " Wo to thee, Corozain; wo to thee, Bethsaida: for if in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in thee, they had done penance, long since, in sackcloth and ashes." To signify the intensity of this sorrow, the " detestation of sin," of which we speak, is properly expressed by the word " contrition," a word which, literally understood, means the breaking into small parts by means of some harder substance, and which is here used metaphorically, to signify that our hearts, hardened by pride, are subdued and reduced by penance. Hence no other sorrow, not even that which is felt for the death of parents, or children, or for any other visitation however calamitous, is called contrition: the word is exclusively employed to express the sorrow with which we are overwhelmed by the forfeiture of the grace of God and of our own innocence. It is, however, often designated by other names: sometimes it is called " contrition of heart," because the word "heart" is frequently used in Scripture to express the will, for as the heart is the principle, which originates the motion of the human system; so, the will is the faculty which governs and controls the other powers of the soul. By the holy Fathers it is also called " compunction of heart," and hence the works written by them on contrition they prefer inscribing, treatises on "compunction of heart;" for, as imposthumes are cut with a lancet in order to open a passage to the virulent matter accumulated within; so the heart of the sinner is, as it were, pierced with contrition, to enable it to emit the deadly poison of sin which rankles within it. Hence, contrition is called by the Prophet Joel, a rending of the heart: "Be converted to me," says he, "with all your hearts in fasting, in weeping, in mourning, and rend your hearts."
That for past transgressions the sinner should experience the row should deepest sorrow, a sorrow not to be exceeded, will easily appear from the following considerations. Perfect contrition is an act of charity, emanating from what is called filial fear: the measure of contrition and charity should, therefore, it is obvious, be the same: but the charity which we cherish towards God, is the most perfect love; and, therefore, the sorrow which contrition inspires, should also be the most perfect. God is to be loved above all things; and whatever separates us from God is, there fore, to be hated above all things. It is, also, worthy of observation, that to charity and contrition the language of Scripture assigns the same extent: of charity it is said: " Thou shall love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart:" of contritrition: "Be converted with thy whole heart." Besides, if it is true, that of all objects which solicit our love, God is the supreme good, and no less true, that of all objects which deserve our execration sin is the supreme evil; the same principle which prompts us to confess that God is to be loved above all things, obliges us also of necessity to acknowledge that sin is to be hated above all things. That God is to be loved above all things, so that we should be prepared to sacrifice our lives rather than offend him, these words of the Redeemer declare: " He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me:" " He that will save his life shall lose it." As charity, it is the observation of St. Bernard, recognises neither measure nor limit, or to use his own words, as " the measure of loving God is to love him without measure," so the measure of hating sin should be, to hate sin without measure. Besides, our contrition should be supreme not only in degree, but also in intensity, and thus perfect, excluding all apathy and indifference, according to these words of Deuteronomy: " When thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him: yet so if thou seek him with all thy heart, and all the affliction of thy soul;" and of the prophet Jeremiah: " thou shalt seek me and shalt find me, when thou shalt seek me with all thy heart; and I will be found by thee, saith the Lord." If, however, our contrition be not perfect, it may, nevertheless, be true and efficacious; for as things which fall under the senses frequently touch the heart more sensibly than things purely spiritual, it will sometimes happen that persons feel more intense sorrow for the death of their children, than for the grievousness of their sins. Our contrition may also be true and efficacious, although unaccompanied with tears. That sorrow for his sins bathe the offendler in tears, is, however, much to be desired and commended. On this subject the words of St. Augustine are admirable: " The spirit of Christian charity," says he, " lives not within you, if you lament the body from which the soul has departed, but lament not the soul from which God has departed." To the same effect are the words of the Redeemer above cited: " Wo to thee, Corozain, wo to thee, Bethsaida, for if in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in thee, they had long since done penance, in sack cloth and ashes." Of this, however, we have abundant illustration in the well known examples of the Ninevites, of David, of the woman caught in adultery, and of the Prince of the Apostles, all of whom obtained the pardon of their sins, imploring the mercy of God with abundance of tears.
The faithful are most earnestly to be exhorted to study to direct their contrition specially to each mortal sin into which they may have had the misfortune to fall: " I will recount to thee," says Isaias, " all my years in the bitterness of my soul:" as if he had said, " I will count over all my sins severally, that my heart may be pierced with sorrow for them all." In Ezekiel, also, we read: " If the wicked do penance for all his sins, he shall live." In this spirit, St. Augustine says: " Let the sinner consider the quality of his sins, as affected by time, place, variety, person." In the work of conversion, however, the sinner should not despair of the infinite goodness and mercy of God: he is most desirous of our salvation; and, therefore, refuses not to pardon, but embraces, with a father's fondness, the prodigal child, the moment he returns to a sense of his duty, and is converted to the Lord, detesting his sins, which he will afterwards, if possible, recall, severally, to his recollection, and abhor from his inmost soul. The Almighty himself, by the mouth of his prophet, commands us to hope, when he says: " The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him, in what day soever he shall turn from his wickedness."
To convey a knowledge of the most important qualities of true contrition, what has been said will be found sufficiently comprehensive. In these the faithful are to be accurately instructed, that each may know the means of attaining, and may have a fixed standard by which to determine how far he may be removed from the perfection of this virtue. We must, then, in the first place, detest and deplore all our sins: if our sorrow and detestation extend only to some, our repentance cannot be sincere or salutary: " Whosoever shall keep the whole law," says St. James, " but offend in one point, is become guilty of all." In the next place, our contrition must be accompanied with a desire of confessing and satisfying for our sins: dispositions of which we shall treat in their proper place. Thirdly, the penitent must form a fixed and firm purpose of amendment of life, according to these words of the prophet: " If the wicked do penance for all his sins which he hath committed, and keep all my commandments, and do judgment and justice, living he shall live, and shall not die: I will not remember all his iniquities which he hath done;" and a little after; " Be converted, and do penance for all your iniquities, and iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away from you all your transgressions, by which you have transgressed, and make yourselves a new heart." To the woman caught in adultery the Redeemer himself imparts the same lesson of instruction: " Go thy way, and sin no more," and also to the lame man whom he cured at the pool of Bethsaida: " Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more." That a sorrow for sin, and a firm purpose of avoiding sin for the future, are indispensable to contrition, is the dictate of unassisted reason. He who would be reconciled to a friend, must regret to have injured or offended him; and the tone and tenor of his conduct must be such that the charge of violating the duties of friendship cannot, in future, justly attach to his character. These are principles to which man is bound to yield obedience; the law to which man is subject, be it natural, divine, or human, he is bound to obey. If, therefore, by force or fraud, the penitent has injured his neighbour in his property, he is bound to restitution: if, by word or deed he has injured his honour or reputation, he is under an obligation of repairing the injury, according to the well known maxim of St. Augustine: " the sin is not forgiven unless what has been taken away is restored." In the fourth and last place, and the condition is no less important, true contrition must be accompanied with forgiveness of the injuries which we may have sustained from others. This our Lord emphatically declares and energetically inculcates, when he says: " If you will forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father will forgive you also your offences; but if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive you your offences." These are the conditions which true contrition requires. There are other accompaniments which, although not essential, contribute to render contrition more perfect in its kind, and which will reward, without fatiguing the industry of the pastor.
It will conduce in an eminent degree, to the spiritual interests of the faithful, if the pastor press frequently upon their attention, the efficacy and importance of contrition. To make known the truths of salvation should not be deemed a full discharge of the duty of the pastor: his zeal should be exerted to persuade them to the adoption of these truths as their rule of conduct through life, as the governing principle of all their actions. Other pious exercises, such as alms, fasting, prayer, and the like, in them selves holy and commendable, are sometimes, through human infirmity, rejected by Almighty God; but contrition can never be rejected by him, never prove unacceptable to him: " A con trite and humbled heart, O God!" exclaims the prophet, "thou wilt not despise." Nay more, the same prophet declares that, as soon as we have conceived this contrition in our hearts, our sins are forgiven: " I said, I will confess my injustice to the Lord, and thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my sin." Of this we have a figure in the ten lepers, who, when sent by our Lord to the priests, were cured of their leprosy, before they had reached them; to give us to understand, that such is the efficacy of true contrition, of which we have spoken above, that through it we obtain from God the immediate pardon of our sins.
To excite the faithful to contrition, it will be found very salutary if the pastor point out the spiritual exercises conducive to contrition. This is to be accomplished by admonishing them, frequently to examine their consciences, in order to ascertain if they have been faithful in the observance of those things which God and his Church require; and should any one be conscious of crime, he should immediately accuse himself, humbly solicit pardon from God, and implore time to confess, and satisfy for his sins. Above all, let him supplicate the aid of divine grace, by which he may be fortified against a relapse into those crimes, the commission of which he now penitently deplores. The faithful are also to be excited to a hatred of sin, arising from the consideration of its baseness and turpitude, and of the evils and calamities of which it is the poisoned source, estranging us, as it does, from the friendship of God, to whom we are already indebted for so many invaluable blessings, and from whom we might have expected to receive gifts of still higher value, and consigning us to eternal death, to be the unhappy victims of the most excruciating torments.
Having said thus much on contrition, we now come to confession, which is another part of penance. The care and exactness which its exposition demands, must be at once obvious, if we only reflect, that whatever of piety, of holiness, of religion, has been preserved to our times in the Church of God, is, in the general opinion of the truly pious, to be ascribed in a great measure, under divine Providence, to the influence of Confession. It cannot, therefore, be matter of surprise, that the enemy of the human race, in his efforts to level to its foundation the fabric of Catholicity, should, through the agency of the ministers of his wicked designs, have assailed, with all his might, this bulwark of Christian virtue. The pastor, therefore, will teach, in the first place, that the institution of confession is most useful and even necessary.
Contrition, it is true, blots out sin; but who is ignorant, that to effect this, it must be so intense, so ardent, so vehement, as to bear a proportion to the magnitude of the crimes which it effaces? This is a degree of contrition which few reach, and hence, through perfect contrition alone, very few indeed could hope to obtain the pardon of their sins. It, therefore, became necessary, that the Almighty, in his mercy, should afford a less precarious and less difficult means of reconciliation, and of salvation; and this he has done, in his admirable wisdom, by giving to his Church the keys of the kingdom of heaven. According to the doctrine of the Catholic Church, a doctrine firmly to be believed and professed by all her children, if the sinner have recourse to the tribunal of penance with a sincere sorrow for his sins, and a firm resolution of avoiding them in future, although he bring not with him that contrition which may be sufficient of itself to obtain the pardon of sin; his sins are for given by the minister of religion, through the power of the keys. Justly, then, do the Holy Fathers proclaim, that by the keys of the Church, the gate of heaven is thrown open; a truth which the decree of the Council of Florence, declaring that the effect of penance is absolution from sin, renders it imperative on all, unhesitatingly to believe.
To appreciate the advantages of confession, we should not lose sight of an argument which has the sanction of experience. To those who have led immoral lives, nothing is found so useful towards a reformation of morals, as sometimes to disclose their secret thoughts, their words, their actions, to a prudent and faithful friend, who can guide them by his advice, and assist them by his co-operation. On the same principle must it prove most salutary to those, whose minds are agitated by the consciousness of guilt, to make known the diseases and wounds of their souls to the priest, as the vicegerent of Jesus Christ, bound to eternal secrecy by every law human and divine. In the tribunal of penance they will find immediate remedies, the healing qualities of which will not only remove the present malady, but also prove of such lasting efficacy as to be, in future, an anti dote against the easy approach of the same moral disease.
Another advantage, derivable from confession, is too important to be omitted: confession contributes powerfully to the preservation of social order. Abolish sacramental confession, and, that moment, you deluge society with all sorts of secret crimes - crimes too, and others of still greater enormity, which men, once that they have been depraved by vicious habits, will not dread to commit in open day. The salutary shame that attends confession, restrains licentiousness, bridles desire, and coerces the evil propensities of corrupt nature.
Having explained the advantages of confession, the pastor will next unfold its nature and efficacy. Confession, then, is defined " A sacramental accusation of one's self, made to obtain pardon by virtue of the keys." It is properly called " an accusation," because sins are not to be told as if the sinner boasted of his crimes, as they do, " who are glad when they have done evil;" nor are they to be related as idle stories or passing occurrences, to amuse: they are to be confessed as matters of self-accusation, with a desire, as it were, to avenge them on ourselves. But we confess our sins with a view to obtain the pardon of them; and, in this respect, the tribunal of penance differs from other tribunals, which take cognizance of capital offences, and before which a confession of guilt is sometimes made, not to secure acquittal but to justify the sentence of the law. The definition of confession by the Holy Fathers, although different in words, is substantially the same: " Confession," says St. Augustine, " is the disclosure of a secret disease, with the hope of obtaining a cure;" and St. Gregory; " confession is a detestation of sins:" both of which accord with, and are contained in the preceding definition.
The pastor will next teach, with all the decision due to a revealed truth, a truth of paramount importance, that this Sacrament owes its institution to the singular goodness and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, who ordered all things well, and solely with a view to our salvation. After his resurrection, he breathed on the assembled Apostles, saying: " Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins you shall retain, they are retained." By in vesting the sacerdotal character with power to retain as well as to remit sins, he thus, it is manifest, constitutes them judges in the causes on which this discretionary power is to be exercised. This he seems to have signified when, having raised Lazarus from the dead, he commanded his Apostles to loose him from the bands in which he was bound. This is the interpretation of St. Augustine: " they," says he, " the priests, can now do more: they can exercise greater clemency towards those who confess, and whose sins they forgive. The Lord by the hands of his Apostles delivered Lazarus, whom he had already raised from the dead, to be loosed by the hands of his disciples; thus giving us to understand that to priests was given the power of loosing." To this, also, refers the command given by our Lord to the lepers cured on the way, to show themselves to the priests, and subject themselves to their judgment. In vested, then, as they are, by our Lord with power to remit and retain sins, priests are, evidently, appointed judges of the matter on which they are to pronounce; and as, according to the wise admonition of the Council of Trent, we cannot form an accurate judgment on any matter, or award to crime a just proportion of punishment, without having previously examined, and made ourselves well acquainted with the cause; hence arises a necessity, on the part of the penitent, of making known to the priest, through the medium of confession, each and every sin. This doctrine, a doctrine defined by the holy synod of Trent, the uniform doctrine of the Catholic Church, the pastor will teach. An attentive perusal of the Holy Fathers will present innumerable passages throughout their works, proving in the clearest terms that this Sacrament was instituted by our Lord, and that the law of sacramental confession, which, from the Greek, they call " exomologesis," and " exagoreusis," is to be received as evangelical. That the different sorts of sacrifices, which were offered by the priests for the expiation of different sorts of sins, seem, beyond all doubt, to have reference to sacramental confession, an examination of the figures of the Old Testament will also evince.
