The Sacraments · Penance (4 of 4)
This sort of satisfaction, embracing, as it does, many degrees, admits of many acceptations. The first degree of satisfaction, and that which stands pre-eminently above all the rest, is that by which whatever is due by us to God, on account of our sins, is paid abundantly, although he should deal with us according to the strictest rigour of his justice. This, we say, has appeased God and rendered him propitious to us, and for it we are indebted to Christ alone, who, having paid the price of our sins on the cross, offered to his Eternal Father a superabundant satisfaction. No created being could have paid so heavy a debt for us: " He is the propitiation for our sins," says St. John, " and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world." This satisfaction, therefore, is full and superabundant, commensurate to all sorts of sins perpetrated by the human race: it gives to man's actions merit before God; without it they could avail him nothing to eternal life. This David seems to have had in view, when, having asked himself, " what shall I render to the Lord, for all the things that he hath rendered to me?" and finding nothing worthy of such blessings but this satisfaction, which he expressed by the word " chalice," he replies: " I will take the chalice of salvation, and I will call upon the name of the Lord."
There is another sort of satisfaction, which is called canonical, and is performed within a certain fixed period of time. Hence, according to the most ancient practice of the Church, when penitents are absolved from their sins, some penance is imposed, the performance of which is commonly called " satisfaction."
Any sort of punishment endured for sin, although not imposed by the priest, but spontaneously undertaken by the sinner, is also called by the same name: it belongs not, however, to penance as a sacrament: the satisfaction which constitutes part of the sacrament is, as we have already said, that which is imposed by the priest, and which must be accompanied with a deliberate and firm purpose carefully to avoid sin for the future. To satisfy, as some define it, is to pay due honour to God, and this, it is evident, no person can do, who is not resolved to avoid sin. To satisfy is also to cut off* all occasions of sin, and to close every avenue of the heart against its suggestions. In accordance with this idea of satisfaction, some have considered it a cleansing, which effaces whatever defilement may remain in the soul from the stains of sin, and which exempts us from the temporal chastisements due to sin.
Such being the nature of satisfaction, it will not be found difficult to convince the faithful of the necessity imposed on the penitent, of satisfying for his sins: they are to be taught that sin carries in its train two evils, the stain which it affixes, and the punishment which it entails. The punishment of eternal death is, it is true, forgiven with the sin to which it was due, yet, as the Council of Trent declares, the stain is not always entirely effaced, nor is the temporal punishment always remit ted. Of this the Scriptures afford many evident examples, as we find in the third chapter of Genesis, in the twelfth and twenty-second of Numbers, and in many other places. That of David, however, is the most conspicuous and illustrious. Already had Nathan announced to him: " The Lord also hath taken away thy sin, thou shalt not die;" yet the royal penitent voluntarily subjected himself to the most severe penance, imploring, night and day, the mercy of God, in these words: " Wash me yet more from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, for I know my iniquity and my sin is always before me." Thus did he beseech God to pardon not only the crime, but also the punishment due to it, and to restore him, cleansed from the stains of sin, to his former state of purity and integrity. This is the object of his most earnest supplications to the throne of God, and yet the Almighty punishes his transgression with the death of his adulterous offspring, the rebellion and death of his beloved son Absalom, and with the other heavy chastisements with which his vengeance had already threatened him. In Exodus too the Almighty, although yielding to the importunity of Moses, he had spared the idolatrous Israelites, threatens the enormity of their crime with heavy chastisement; and Moses himself declares, that the Lord will take vengeance on it, even to the third and fourth generation. That such was at all times the doctrine of the Fathers, a reference to their writings will place beyond the possibility of doubt.
Why in the sacrament of penance, as in that of baptism, the punishment due to sin is not entirely remitted, is admirably explained in these words of the Council of Trent: " Divine justice seems to require, that they who through ignorance sinned before baptism, should recover the friendship of God in a different manner from those, who, freed from the thraldom of sin and the slavery of the devil, and having received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, dread not knowingly to violate the temple of God and grieve the Holy Spirit. It also consists with the divine mercy not to remit our sins without satisfaction, lest, taking occasion hence, and imagining our sins less grievous than they are, injurious, as it were, and contumelious to the Holy Ghost, we fall into greater enormities, treasuring up to ourselves wrath against the day of wrath. These satisfactory penances have, no doubt, great influence in restraining from sin, in bridling, as it were, the passions, and rendering the sinner more vigilant and cautious for the future." Another advantage resulting from them is, that they serve as public testimonies of our sorrow for sin, and atone to the Church who is grievously insulted by the crimes of her children: " God," says St. Augustine, " despises not a contrite and humble heart, but, as heartfelt grief is gene rally concealed from others, and is not communicated by words or other signs, wisely, therefore, are penitential times appointed by those who preside over the Church, in order to atone to the Church, in which sins are forgiven." Besides, the example presented by our penitential practices, serves as a lesson to others, how to regulate their lives, and practise piety: seeing the punishments inflicted on sin, they must feel the necessity of using the greatest circumspection through life, and of correcting their former evil habits. The Church, therefore, with great wisdom ordained, that those who by their scandalous disorders may have given public disedification, should atone for them by public Church. penance, that others may be thus deterred from their commission. This has sometimes been observed even with regard to secret sins, when marked by peculiar malignity. But with regard to public sinners, they, as we have already said, were never absolved until they had performed public penance. Mean while, the pastor poured out his prayers to God for their salvation, and ceased not to exhort them to do the same. This salutary practice gave active employment to the zeal and solicitude of St. Ambrose; many, who came to the tribunal of penance hardened in sin, were by his tears softened into true contrition. But in process of time the severity of ancient discipline was so relaxed, and charity waxed so cold, that in our days many seem to think inward sorrow of soul and grief of heart unnecessary, and deem the semblance of sorrow sufficient.
Again, by undergoing these penances we are made like unto the image of Jesus Christ our head, inasmuch as he himself suffered and was tempted, 3 and, as St. Bernard observes, "nothing can appear so unseemly as a delicate member under a head crowned with thorns." To use the words of the Apostle, "we are joint-heirs with Christ, yet so if we suffer with him;" and again: " If we be dead with him, we shall live also with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him."
St. Bernard also observes, that sin produces two effects in the soul; the one, the stain which it imparts, the other, the wound which it inflicts; that the turpitude of sin is removed through the mercy of God, whilst to heal the wound inflicted the medicinal care applied by penance is most necessary; for as after a wound has been healed, some scars remain which demand attention, so with regard to the soul, after the guilt of sin is forgiven, some of its effects remain, from which the soul requires to be cleansed. St. Chrysostome also fully confirms the same doctrine, when he says: " Not enough that the arrow has been extracted from the body, the wound which it inflicted must also be healed: so with regard to the soul, not enough that sin has been pardoned, the wound which it has left, must also be healed by penance." St. Augustine, also, frequently teaches that penance exhibits at once the mercy and the justice of God, his mercy by which he pardons sin, and the eternal punishment due to sin, his justice by which he exacts temporary punishment from the sinner.
Finally, the punishment which the sinner endures, disarms the vengeance of God, and prevents the punishments decreed against us, according to these words of the Apostle: " If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged; but whilst we are judged, we are chastised by the Lord, that we be not condemned with this world." These matters, if explained to the faithful, must have considerable influence in exciting them to penance.
Of the great efficacy of penance we may form some idea, if we reflect that it arises entirely from the merits of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: it is his passion that imparts to our good actions the two-fold quality of meriting the rewards of eternal life, so that a cup of cold water given in his name shall not be without its reward, and, also, of satisfying for our sins. Nor does this derogate from the most perfect and superabundant satisfaction of Christ, but, on the contrary, renders it still more conspicuous and illustrious; the grace of Jesus Christ appears to abound more, inasmuch as it communicates to us not only what he alone merited, but also what, as head, he merited and paid in his members, that is, in holy and just men. This it is that imparts such weight and dignity to the good actions of the pious Christian; for our Lord Jesus Christ continually infuses his grace into the devout soul united to him by charity, as the head to the members, or as the vine through the branches, and this grace always precedes, accompanies, and follows our good works: without it we can have no merit, nor can we at all satisfy God. Hence it is that nothing seems wanting to the just: by their works done by the power of God, they fulfil the divine law, as far as is compatible with our present condition, and can merit eternal life, to the fruition of which they shall be admit ted, if they depart this life adorned with divine grace: " He," says the Redeemer, " that shall drink of the water that I will give him, shall not thirst for ever; but the water that I will give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into life everlasting."
In satisfaction two things are particularly required; the one, that he who satisfies be in a state of grace, the friend of God: works done without faith and charity cannot be acceptable to God: the other, that the works performed be such as are of their own nature painful or laborious. They are a compensation for past sins, and, to use the words of St. Cyprian, " the redeemers, as it were, of sins," and must, therefore, be such as we have described. It does not, however, always follow Note that they are painful or laborious to those who undergo them: the influence of habit or the intensity of divine love frequently renders the soul insensible to things the most difficult to be endured. Such works, however, do not, therefore, cease to be satisfactory: it is the privilege of the children of God to be so inflamed with his love, that whilst undergoing the most cruel tortures for his sake, they are either entirely insensible to them, or at least bear them not only with fortitude but with the great est joy.
The pastor will teach that every species of satisfaction is included under these three heads, prayer, fasting, and alms-deeds, which correspond with these three sorts of goods, those of the soul, of the body, and what are called external goods, all of which are the gifts of God. Than these three sorts of satisfaction, nothing can be more effectual in eradicating sin from the soul. Whatever is in the world is the lust of the flesh, the " lust of the eyes, or pride of life," and fasting, alms-deeds, and prayer are, it is obvious, most judiciously employed as antidotes to neutralize the operation of these three causes of spiritual disease; to the first is opposed fasting; to the second, alms-deeds; to the third, prayer. If, moreover, we consider those whom our sins injure, we shall easily perceive why all satisfaction is referred principally to God, to our neighbour, and to our selves; God we appease by prayer, our neighbour we satisfy by alms, and ourselves we chastise by fasting.
But, as this life is checkered by many and various afflictions, the faithful are to be particularly reminded, that afflictions coming from the hand of God, if borne with patience, are an abundant source of satisfaction and of merit; but, if borne with reluctant impatience, far from being the means of atoning for past sins, they are rather the instruments of the divine wrath, taking just vengeance on the sinner.
But in this the mercy and goodness of God shine conspicuous, and demand our grateful acknowledgments, that he has granted to our frailty the privilege that one may satisfy for an other. This, however, is a privilege which is confined to the satisfactory part of penance alone, and extends not to contrition and confession: no man can be contrite or confess for another; whilst those who are gifted with divine grace may pay through others what is due to the divine justice, and thus we may be said in some measure to bear each other's burdens. This is a doctrine on which the faithful cannot for a moment entertain a doubt, professing, as we do, in the Apostle's Creed, our belief in the " Communion of Saints." Regenerated, as we all are, to Christ in the same cleansing waters of baptism, partakers of the same sacraments, and, above all, of the same heavenly food, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are all, it is manifest, members of the same mystical body. As then the foot does not perform its functions solely for itself, but also for sake of the other members, and as the other members perform their respective functions, not only for their own, but also for the common good; so works of satisfaction are common to all the members of the Church. This, however, is not universally true in reference to all the advantages to be derived from works of satisfaction: of these works some are also medicinal, and are so many specific remedies prescribed to the penitent, to heal the depraved affections of the heart; a fruit which, it is evident, they alone can derive from them, who satisfy for themselves. Of these particulars touching the three parts of penance, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, it is the duty of the pastor to give an ample and clear exposition.
The confessor, however, will be scrupulously careful, before N he absolves the penitent whose confession he has heard, to insist that ii he has been really guilty ot having injured his neighbour in property or character, he make reparation for the injury: promised no person is to be absolved until he has first faithfully promised to repair fully the injury done; and, as there are many who, although free to make large promises to comply with their duty in this respect, are yet deliberately determined not to fulfil them, they should be obliged to make restitution, and the words of the Apostle are to be strongly and frequently pressed upon upon their minds: " He that stole,, let him now steal no more; but rather let him labour working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have something to give to him that suffereth need."
But, in imposing penance, the confessor will do nothing arbitrarily; he will be guided solely by justice, prudence, and piety; and in order to follow this rule, and also to impress more deeply on the mind of the penitent the enormity of sin, he will find it expedient to remind him of the severe punishments inflicted by the ancient penitential canons, as they are called, for certain sins. The nature of the sin, therefore, will regulate the extent of the satisfaction: but no satisfaction can be more salutary than to require of the penitent to devote, for a certain number of days, a certain portion of time to prayer, not omit ting to supplicate the divine mercy in behalf of all mankind, and particularly for those who have departed this life in the Lord. Penitents should, also, be exhorted to undertake of their own accord, the frequent performance of the penances usually imposed by the confessor, and so to order the tenor of their future lives that, having faithfully complied with every thing which the sacrament of Penance demands, they may never cease studiously to practise the virtue of penance. But, should it be deemed proper sometimes to visit public crimes with public penance, and should the penitent express great reluctance to submit to its performance, his importunity is not to be readily yielded to: he should be persuaded to embrace with cheerfulness that which is so salutary to himself and to others. These things, which regard the sacrament of Penance and its several parts, the pastor will teach in such a manner as to enable the faithful not only to understand them perfectly, but, also, with the Divine assistance, piously and religiously to reduce them to practice.
