The Lord’s Prayer · Introduction (1 of 2)
AMONGST the duties of the pastoral office, it is one of the highest importance to the spiritual interests of the faithful, to instruct them in Christian prayer; the nature and efficacy of which must be unknown to many, if not enforced by the pious and faithful exhortations of the pastor. To this, therefore, should the care of the pastor be directed in a special manner, that the faithful may understand how and for what they are to pray.
Whatever is necessary to the performance of the duty of prayer is comprised in that divine form, which Christ our Lord vouchsafed to make known to his Apostles, and, through them and their successors, to all Christians. The sentiments which it expresses, and the words in which they are conceived, should, therefore, be so deeply impressed on the mind and memory, as to enable us to address it to God promptly and at all times. To assist the pastor, however, in teaching the faithful to pray, we have selected and set down from those writers, whose reputation for talents and learning on this head commands the highest respect, whatever appeared to us most instructive on the subject, leaving it to the pastor to draw upon the same source for further information, should he deem it necessary.
In the first place, then, the pastor is to teach the necessity of prayer; a duty not only recommended by way of counsel, but of also enforced by positive precept. Our Lord himself has said: " We should pray always;" and this necessity of prayer the Church declares in the prelude, if we may so call it, prefixed to the Lord's prayer in her liturgy: " Admonished by salutary precepts, and taught by divine instruction, we presume to say, Our Father, &c. Seeing, therefore, the necessity of prayer to the Christian, and at the solicitation of his disciples, " Lord teach us to pray," the Son of God gave them a prescribed form of prayer, and encouraged them to hope, that the objects of their petitions would be granted. He himself was to them a model of prayer: he not only prayed assiduously, but watched whole nights in prayer. The Apostles, also, did not omit to deliver precepts on the subject: on this duty St. Peter, and St. John are incessant in their admonitions to the faithful; and St. Paul, not unmindful of its importance, frequently admonishes us of the salutary necessity of prayer. Besides, so various are our temporal and spiritual necessities, so numerous the blessings which we expect to receive, that we must have recourse to prayer as the best organ to communicate our wants, and the surest channel through which to receive whatever succour we need. Of God nothing is due to us: it is ours, therefore, to supplicate his goodness. He has constituted prayer as a necessary means for the accomplishment of our desires; and its necessity becomes still more obvious, when we reflect, that there are blessings which we cannot hope to obtain otherwise than through prayer. Holy prayer, such is its efficacy, is a most powerful means of casting out demons: this kind of demon is not cast out but by prayer and fasting."
Those, therefore, who do not practise assiduous prayer, rob themselves of the means of obtaining from God gifts of singular value. To succeed in obtaining the object of your desires, not enough that you ask that which is good; your intreaties must also be assiduous: "Every one that asketh," says St. Jerome, "receiveth: if, therefore, it will not be given you, it is because you do not ask it: ask, therefore, and you shall receive. "
But prayer is not only a necessary, but also, a most pleasing and salutary exercise of devotion, from which we reap an abundant harvest of spiritual fruit. On these fruits of prayer, the pastor will consult spiritual writers, and, when necessary for the instruction of the faithful, will draw copiously upon their labours. We have, however, made a selection from their accumulated treasures, which appeared to us to suit the present purpose.
The first fruit which we receive from prayer is, that by prayer we honour God; prayer is, in some sort, a proof of religion; and is compared, in Scripture, to incense: " Let my prayer," says David, " be directed as incense in thy sight." By prayer we confess our subjection to God, whom we acknowledge and proclaim to be the author of all good; in whom alone we centre all our hopes; who alone is our refuge, in all dangers; and whose protecting care is the bulwark of our salvation. Of this fruit of prayer we are admonished, in these words of the Psalmist; " Call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me."
Another most pleasing and invaluable fruit of prayer, when heard by God, is, that it opens to us heaven; " Prayer is the key of heaven," says St. Augustine; " prayer ascends, and mercy descends; high as are the heavens, and low as is the earth, God hears the voice of man." Such is the utility, such the efficacy of prayer, that through it we obtain the plenitude of heavenly gifts, the guidance and aid of the Holy Spirit, the security and preservation of the faith, escape from punishment, protection under temptation, victory over the Devil; in a word, there is, in prayer, an accumulation of spiritual joy: " Ask, and you shall receive, that your joy may be full."
Nor can we, for a moment, doubt that God is, at all times, ready to hear our petitions; a truth to which the sacred Scriptures bear ample testimony. As, however, the texts which go petitions. to establish it are easy of access, we shall content ourselves with citing a few from the Prophet Isaias. " Then," says he, " shalt thou call, and the Lord will hear: thou shalt cry, and he will say, here I am;" and again, " It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will hear: as they are yet speaking, I will hear." With regard to instances of persons, who have obtained from God the objects of their prayers, they are almost innumerable, and too much within the reach of all to require special mention.
But our prayers are sometimes unheard? True; and God then consults, in a special manner, for our interests, bestowing on us other gifts, of higher value, and in greater abundance; or withholding what we ask, because, far from being necessary or useful, its concession would prove not only superfluous, but even injurious. " God," says St. Augustine, denies some things in his mercy, which he grants in his wrath." Some times, also, such is the remissness and negligence with whkrh we pray, that we ourselves do not attend to what we say. If prayer is an elevation of the soul to God, and if, whilst we pray, the mind, instead of being fixed upon God, is lost in wandering distractions, and the tongue slurs over the words at random, without attention, without devotion, with what propriety can we give to such empty sounds the name of prayer? We should not, therefore, be at all surprised, if God does not comply with our requests; we who, by our negligence, and by our ignorance of the very object of our petitions, afford practical proof that we are regardless of being heard by him; or who, if we pray with attention, solicit those things, which, if granted, must be prejudicial to our eternal interests. To those who pray with devout attention, God grants more than they ask. This the Apostle declares, in his epistle to the Ephesians; and the same truth is unfolded in the parable of the prodigal son, who would have deemed it a kindness to be admitted into the number of his father's servants; but who was received, by a forgiving parent, with more than a parent's fondness. Nay, when we are properly disposed, God accumulates his favours on us. even when we ask them not; and this, not only with abundance, but also with a readiness, which anticipates our desires. Without waiting for their utterance, God prevents the inward and silent aspirations of the poor, according to these words of Scripture: " The Lord hath heard the desire of the poor."
Another fruit of prayer is, that it exercises and augments the Christian virtues, particularly the virtue of faith. As they, who have not faith in God, cannot pray as they ought; " How can they call on him, whom they have not believed?" so, the faithful, in proportion to the fervour of their prayers, possess a stronger and a more assured faith in the protecting providence of God, which requires, principally, that, in all things which we have occasion to supplicate from his bounty, we submit ourselves to his sovereign will. God, it is true, might bestow on us all things abundantly, although we asked them not, nor even thought of them, as he bestows on the irrational creation all things necessary for the support of life: but our most bountiful Father wishes to be invoked by his children; he wishes that, praying as we ought each day of our lives, we may pray with increased confidence; by acceding to our petitions, he wishes, every day, to give fresh proofs and manifestations of his parental kindness towards us.
Our charity is also augmented by prayer. Recognizing God as the author of every blessing, and the source of every good, we cling to him with the most devoted love. As those who cherish a sincere and mutual affection, become more ardently attached by frequent interviews and interchanges of sentiment, so the more frequent the aspirations which the pious soul breathes to God, and the closer the converse which she enjoys with him, by imploring his bounteous mercy, the more exquisite is the sense of delight which she experiences, and the more Fifth. ardently is she inflamed to love and adore him. He will, therefore, have us to make use of the exercise of prayer, that, burning with the desire of asking what we are anxious to obtain, we may thus make such advances in spiritual life, as to be worthy to obtain those blessings, which the soul, before dry and contracted, was incapable of receiving.
Moreover, God would have us to know, and always to keep in recollection, this revealed truth, that, unassisted by his heavenly grace, we can of ourselves do nothing, and should, therefore, apply ourselves to prayer, with all the powers of our souls. The weapons which prayer supplies are most powerful against our most implacable foes: " With the cries of our prayers," says St. Hilary, " we must fight against the devil and his armed hosts."
From prayer, we also derive this important advantage, that, inclining as we do, to evil, by the innate corruption of our own hearts, and to the indulgence of sensual appetite, God permits us to bring him, in a special manner, present to our minds; that, whilst we address him in prayer, and endeavour to merit his gifts and graces, we may be inspired with a love of innocence, and, by effacing our sins, be purified from every stain of guilt.
Finally, as St. Jerome observes, prayer disarms the anger of God. Hence, these words addressed to Moses, " Let me alone," when Moses sought to interpose his prayer for the protection of a guilty people. Nothing is so efficacious in appeasing God, when his wrath is kindled; nothing so effectually averts his fury, when provoked; nothing so powerfully arrests his arm, when already uplifted to strike the wicked, as the prayers of the pious.
The necessity and advantages of Christian prayer being thus explained, the faithful should also know how many, and what are the parts of which it is composed. That this knowledge appertains to the perfect discharge of the duty of prayer we learn from the Apostle, when, in his Epistle to Timothy, exhorting to pious and holy prayer, he carefully enumerates the parts of which it consists: " I desire therefore first," says he, " that obsecrations, prayers, postulations and thanksgivings be made for all men." Although the shades of distinction between these different parts of prayer are delicate and refined, yet the pastor, should he deem the explanation useful to his people, will consult, on the subject, the writings of St. Hilary and St. Augustine. But as there are two principal parts of prayer, petition and thanksgiving, the sources, as it were, from which all the other spring, they appeared to us of too much import ance to be omitted. When we offer to God the tribute of our worship, we do so either to obtain some favour, or to return him thanks for those with which his bounty every day enriches and adorns us; and each of these God himself declares to be a necessary part of prayer: " Call upon me," says he, " in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me."
Who does not know how much we stand in need of the goodness and beneficence of God, if he but consider the extreme destitution and misery of man? Who that has eyes to see, and understanding to judge, and does not know how much the will of God inclines, and how liberal is his bounty towards us? Wherever we cast our eyes, wherever we turn our thoughts, the admirable light of the divine goodness and beneficence beams upon us. What have we that is not the gift of his bounty? If, then, all things are the gifts and favours bestowed on us by his goodness, why should not every tongue, as much as possible, celebrate the praises of God, and every heart throb with the pulsation of gratitude, for his boundless beneficence?
Of these duties of petition and thanksgiving each contains many subordinate degrees. In order, therefore, that the faithful may not only pray but also pray in the best manner, the pastor will propose to them the most perfect manner of praying, and will exhort them to it with the greatest earnestness. What, then, is the best manner and the most exalted degree of prayer? That which is made use of by the pious and the just, who, resting on the solid foundation of the true faith, rise successively from one degree of purity and of fervour in prayer to another, until, at length, they reach that height of perfection, whence they can contemplate the infinite power, beneficence, and wisdom of God; where, too, they are cheered with a bright prospect, and animated with the assured hope, of obtaining not only those blessings which engage their desires in this life, but, also those unutterable rewards, which lie beyond the confines of this world, and which God has pledged himself to grant to him who piously and religiously implores his assistance. Soaring as it were to heaven on these two wings, the soul approaches, in fervent desire, the throne of the Divinity; adores with rapturous praise and thanksgiving, that Great Being from whom she has received such inestimable blessings; and, like an only child, animated with singular piety and profound veneration, lays open to her most beloved Father all her wants. This sort of prayer the Sacred Scriptures express by the words " pouring out:" "In his sight," says the prophet, " I pour out my prayer, and before him I declare my trouble;" as if he had said; "From him I suppress, from him I conceal nothing, but pour out my whole soul in prayer, flying with confidence into the bosom of God, my most loving father." To this holy exercise the Sacred Scriptures exhort us in these words: " Pour out thy heart be fore him," " and cast thy care upon the Lord." This is that degree of prayer to which St. Augustine alludes when he says: " What faith believes, that hope and charity implore."
Another degree of prayer is that of those, who, pressed down by the weight of mortal guilt, strive, however, with what is called dead faith, to raise themselves from their prostrate condition, and to ascend to God; but, in consequence of their languid state and the extreme weakness of their faith, cannot raise themselves from the earth. Impressed with a just sense of the enormity of their crimes, and stung with remorse of conscience, they bow themselves down with humility, and, far as they are removed from him, implore of God a penitential sorrow, the pardon of their sins, and the peace of reconciliation. The prayers of such persons are not rejected by God: they are graciously heard by him; nay, in his mercy, he generously invites such sinners to have recourse to him; " Come to me, all you that labour, and are heavily laden, and I will refresh you." Of this class of sinners was the Publican, who, not daring to raise his eyes towards heaven, left the temple, as our Lord declares, more justified than the Pharisee.
A third degree of prayer is that which is offered by those, who have not as yet been illumined with the light of faith; but who, whilst the divine goodness lights up in their souls the feeble glimmerings of the law of nature, are strongly excited to the desire and pursuit of truth, to arrive at a knowledge of which is the object of their most earnest prayers. If they persevere in such dispositions, God, in his mercy, will not neglect their earnest endeavours, as we see verified by the example of Cornelius the centurion; against none who desire it sincerely are the doors of the divine mercy closed.
The last degree is that of those, who, not only impenitent but obdurate, adding crime to crime, and enormity to enormity, yet dare frequently to ask pardon of God for those sins, in which they are resolved to persevere. Under such circumstances, and with such dispositions, who would presume to ask pardon even of his fellow-man? To the prayer of such sinners God turns a deaf ear, as it is recorded in Scripture of Antiochus: " Then this wicked man prayed to the Lord, of whom he was not to obtain mercy." Whoever lives in this deplorable condition should be exhorted to wean himself from all affection to sin, to turn to God in good earnest and from the heart.
As, under the head of each petition, we shall point out in its proper place, what is, and what is not a proper object of prayer, it will here suffice to admonish the faithful, in general terms, to ask of God such things as are just and good; lest, suing for what is not conformable to his known will, they may be answered in these words: " You know not what you desire." Whatever it is lawful to desire, it is lawful to pray for: the promise of our Lord is unlimited: " You shall ask whatever you will, and it shall be done unto you;" words which ensure all things to pious prayer.
In the first place, then, to refer every thing to God, the Supreme Good, the great object of our love, the centre of all our desires, is the principle which should regulate all our wishes. In the next place, those things which unite us most closely to God should be the objects of our most earnest desires; whilst those which would separate us from him, or occasion that separation, should have no share in them. From this principle we may learn how, after the supreme and perfect good, we are to desire and ask from God our Father those other things which are called goods. With regard to those which are called external goods, and, as it said, belong to the body, such as health, strength, beauty, riches, honours, glory, which often supply matter and give occasion to sin, and which, therefore, it is not always either pious or salutary to ask, they are not to be objects of our prayers without this limitation, that we pray for them, because necessary, at the same time, referring to God the motive of our prayer. It cannot be deemed unlawful to pray for those things for which Jacob and Solomon prayed; " If," says Jacob, " he shall give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, the Lord shall be my God;? " Give me," says Solomon, " only the necessaries of life." Whilst, however, we are supplied by the bounty of God with food and raiment, we should not forget the admonition of the Apostle: " Let them that buy, be as if they possessed not; and those that use this world, as if they used it not; for the figure of this world passeth away;" and again, " If riches abound, set not your hearts upon them." To us, therefore, belong only their use and advantage, with an obligation, how ever, as we learn from God himself, of sharing with the indigent. If we are blessed with health and strength, if we abound in other external and corporal goods, we should recollect that they are given to us in order to enable us to serve God with greater fidelity, and as the means of lending assistance to the wants and necessities of others.
But genius and the acquirements that adorn it, such as erudition and the arts, it is also lawful to pray for, provided our prayers are accompanied with this condition, that the advantages which they afford, serve to promote the glory of God, and our own salvation. That, however, which is to be absolutely and unconditionally the object of our wishes, our desires, our pray ers, is, as we have already observed, the glory of God, and, next to it, whatever can serve to unite us to that supreme good, such as faith, the fear and love of God; but of these we shall treat at large, when we come to explain the petitions of the Lord's Prayer.
The objects of prayer known, the faithful are next to be taught for whom they are pray. Prayer comprehends petition and thanksgiving; and we shall, therefore, first treat of petition. We are, then, to pray for all mankind, without exception of enemies, nation, or religion: every man, be he enemy, stranger, or infidel, is our neighbour, whom God commands us to love, and for whom, therefore, we should discharge a duty of love, which is prayer. To the discharge of this duty the Apostle exhorts when he says: "I desire that prayer be made for all men." In such prayers the spiritual interests of our neighbour should hold the first, his temporal, the second place. This duty we owe to our pastors before all others, as we learn from the example of the Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossians, in which he solicits them to pray for him, " that God may open unto him a door of speech;" a solicitation which he also repeats in his Epistle to the Thessalonians. In the acts of the Apostles, we also read that " prayers were offered in the church without intermission for Peter." St. Basil, in his " Morals," urges to a faithful compliance with this salutary obligation: " We must," says he, " pray for those who preside over the word of truth." That it is incumbent on us to offer up our prayers for princes is obvious from the recorded sentiments of the same Apostle. Who does not know what a singular blessing the Commonwealth enjoys in a religious and just prince? We should, therefore, beseech God to make them such as they ought to be, fit persons to rule over those who are subject to their authority.
