The Lord’s Prayer · Introduction (2 of 2)
To offer up our prayers also for the good and pious is a practice sanctioned and supported by the authority of holy men. Even the good and the pious have occasion for the prayers of others; and this is a wise dispensation of Providence, that, aware of the necessity they are under of being aided by the prayers of those who are inferior to them in sanctity, they may not be inflated with pride. Our Lord has also commanded us, " to pray for those that persecute and calumniate us;" and the practice of praying for those who are not within the pale of the Church, is, as we know on the authority of St. Augustine, of Apostolic origin. We pray that the faith may be made known to infidels; that idolators may be rescued from the error of their impiety; that the Jews, emerging from the darkness with which they are encompassed, may arrive at the light of truth; that heretics, returning to soundness of mind, may be instructed in the true faith; and that schismatics, connected by the bond of true charity, may be united to the communion of the Catholic Church, from which they have separated. The great efficacy of such prayers, when poured from the heart, is evinced by a variety of examples. Numerous instances occur every day in which God rescues individuals of every class which we have enumerated from the powers of darkness, and transfers them into the kingdom of his beloved Son, from vessels of wrath making them vessels of mercy; and that, in realizing so happy a consummation, the prayers of the pious have considerable influence, no one can reasonably doubt.
Prayers for the dead that they may be liberated from the fire of purgatory are of Apostolic origin; but this subject we have already treated at large, when expounding the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Those who are dead in sin derive little advantage from prayers and supplications; yet it is the part of Christian charity to offer up our prayers and tears for them, in order if possible to obtain their reconciliation with God. With regard to the execrations uttered by holy men against the wicked, it is certain, from the concurrent exposition of the Fathers, that they are either prophecies of the evils which are to befall them, or denunciations against the crimes of which they are guilty, that the sinner may be saved, but sin destroyed.
In the second part of prayer, which is " thanksgiving," we render most grateful thanks to God for the divine and immortal blessings which he has always bestowed, and still continues to bestow on the human race. This duty we discharge, principally, when we give singular praises to God for the victory and triumph which, aided by his goodness, the saints have achieved over their domestic and external enemies. To this sort of prayer belongs the first part of the Angelical Salutation. When we say by way of prayer: " Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women," we render to God the highest praise and return him most grateful thanks, because he accumulated all his heavenly gifts on the most Holy Virgin; and to the Virgin herself, for this her singular felicity, we present our respectful and fervent congratulations. To this form of thanksgiving the church of God has wisely added prayers to, and an invocation of, the most holy Mother of God, by which we piously and humbly fly to her patronage, in order that, by interposing her intercession, she may conciliate the friendship of God to us miserable sinners, and may obtain for us those blessings which we stand in need of in this life and in the life to come. Exiled children of Eve, who dwell in this vale of tears, should we not earnestly beseech the Mother of mercy, the advocate of the faithful, to pray for us? Should we not earnestly implore her help and assistance? That she possesses exalted merits with God, and that she is most desirous to assist us by her prayers, it were wicked and impious to doubt. 3
That God is to be prayed to and his name invoked is the language of the law of nature, inscribed upon the tablet of the human heart: it is also the doctrine of revelation, in which we hear God commanding: " Call upon me in the day of trouble;" and, by the word " God," are to be understood the three persons of the adorable Trinity. We must also have recourse to the intercession of the saints who are in glory. That the saints are to be prayed to is a truth so firmly established in the church of God, that the pious mind cannot experience a shadow of doubt on the subject; and as this point of Catholic faith was explained in its proper place, under a separate head, to that explanation we refer the pastor and others. To remove, however, the possibility of error on the part of the unlettered, it will be found useful to explain to the faithful the difference between the invocation of the saints, and the prayers which are offered to God.
We do not address God and the saints in the same manner; God we implore to grant us the blessings of which we stand in need, and to deliver us from the dangers to which we are exposed; but the saints, because they are the friends of God, we solicit to undertake the advocacy of our cause with him, to obtain for us, from him, all necessaries for soul and body. Hence, we make use of two different forms of prayer; to God, we properly say, " Have mercy on us," " Hear us;" but to the saints, " Pray for us." The words " Have mercy on us," we may also address to the saints, for they are most merciful; but we do so on a different principle; we beseech them to be touched with the misery of our condition, and to interpose in our behalf, their influence and intercession before the throne of God. In the performance of this duty, it is strictly incumbent on all not to transfer to creatures the right which belongs exclusively to God; and when, kneeling before the image of a saint, we repeat the Lord's Prayer, we are also to recollect, that we beg of the saint to pray with us, and to obtain for us those favours which we ask of God, in the petitions of the Lord's Prayer; in fine, that he become our interpreter and intercessor with God. That this is an office which the saints discharge, we read in the Apocalypse of John the Apostle.
" Before prayer, prepare thy soul, and be not as a man that tempteth God," is an admonition which has all the weight and authority of revelation. He whose conduct is in direct opposition to his prayers, who, whilst he holds familiar converse with God, suffers his mind to wander, tempts God. As, there fore, the dispositions with which we pray are of such vital importance, the pastor will teach his pious hearers how to pray. The first disposition, then, which should accompany our prayers, is an unfeigned humility of soul, an acknowledgment of our unworthiness, and a conviction that, when we approach God in prayer, our sins render us undeserving, not only of receiving a propitious hearing from him, but even of appearing in his presence. This preparation is frequently mentioned in the inspired Volume: " He hath had regard to the prayer of the humble," says David, " and he hath not despised their petition;" " The prayer of him that humbleth himself," says Ecclesiasticus, " shall pierce the clouds." But on a condition of such obvious importance, we abstain from citing many texts of Scripture. Two examples, however, at which we have already glanced, and which are apposite to our purpose, we shall not pass over in silence. The publican, " who, standing afar off, would not so much as lift up his eyes towards heaven," and the woman, a sinner, who, moved with sorrow, washed the feet of Christ our Lord, with her tears, illustrate the great efficacy which Christian humility imparts to prayer.
The next disposition is a feeling of poignant sorrow, arising from the recollection of our past sins, or, at least, some sense of regret, that we do not experience that poignancy of sorrow. If the sinner bring not with him to prayer both, or, at least one of these dispositions, he cannot hope to obtain the pardon of his sins.
There are some crimes, such as violence and murder, which oppose the greatest obstacles to the efficacy of our prayers, and we must, therefore, preserve our hands unstained by outrage and cruelty: " When you stretch forth your hands," says the Lord, " I will turn away my eyes from you; and when you multiply prayer, I will not hear, for your hands are full of blood." Anger and strife we should also studiously avoid: they have great influence in preventing our prayers from being heard: "I will that men pray in every place," says St. Paul, "lifting up pure hands, without anger and contention." Implacable hatred for injuries received is another obstacle to the efficacy of prayer, which we cannot be too cautious in avoiding: under the influence of such feelings, it is impossible that we should obtain from God the pardon of our sins. " When you shall stand to pray," says our Lord, " forgive, if you have aught against any man;" " but if you will not forgive men, neither will your Father forgive you your offences."
Insensibility and inhumanity to the poor we should also scrupulously avoid, if we hope that our prayers shall prove acceptable to God; "He that stoppeth his ear," says the book of Proverbs, " against the cry of the poor, shall also cry himself, and shall not be heard." What shall we say of pride? Its hatefulness in the sight of God, we learn from these words of St. James: " God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble." What of the contempt of the divine oracles? " He that turneth away his ears," says Solomon, " from hearing the law his prayer shall be an abomination." Here, however, we are not to understand that the humble acknowledgment of the injuries done to our neighbour, of murder, anger, insensibility to the wants of the poor, of pride, contempt of the divine oracles, in fine, of any other sin, is excluded from the objects of prayer, provided we implore pardon from God for these crimes.
Of this preparation of the soul, another essential quality is faith. Without faith, we can have no knowledge of the omnipotence or mercy of God, which are the sources of our confidence in prayer: "All things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer, believing," says the Redeemer, " you shall receive." On these words of our Lord, St. Augustine, speaking of faith, says, " without faith, it is in vain to pray." Prayer, then, as we have already said, to be efficacious, must be sustained by a firm and unwavering faith, as the Apostle shows by this strong antithesis: " How shall they call on him whom they have not believed?" Believe, then, we must, in order to pray, and that we be not wanting in that faith which renders prayer available. Faith it is that prays, and unwavering prayer gives strength to faith. To this effect is the exhortation of the martyr Ignatius, to those who approach the throne of God in prayer: " Be not of doubtful mind in prayer; blessed is he who hath not doubted." To obtain from God the objects of our prayers, faith, and an assured confidence, are, therefore, of the first importance, according to the admonition of St. James; " Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering."
There is much to inspire us with confidence in prayer. Amongst the motives to confidence, are to be numbered the beneficence and bounty of God, displayed towards us, when he commands us to call him " Father," thus giving us to under stand that we are his children; the numberless instances on record of those whose prayers have been heard; and the mediation of our chief advocate, Christ the Lord, who is ever ready to assist us: We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just; and he is the propitiation for our sins;" " Christ Jesus, that died, yea, that is risen also again, who is at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us;" "for there is one God, and one mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus." " Wherefore, it behoved him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might become a merciful and faithful high-priest before God." Unworthy, then, as we are, of obtaining our requests, yet considering, and resting our claims upon, the dignity of our great Mediator and Intercessor, Jesus Christ, we should hope and trust most confidently, that, through his merits, God will grant us all that we ask in the proper spirit of prayer. Finally, the Holy Ghost is the author of our prayers; and under his guiding influence, we cannot fail to be heard. " We have received the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry, Abba, (Father.)" This spirit succours our infirmity, and enlightens our ignorance, in the discharge of the duty of prayer; " and," continues the Apostle, " asketh for us with unspeakable groanings." Should we, then, at any time waver, not being sufficiently strong in faith, let us say, with the Apostle, " Lord increase our faith;" and, with the father of the blind man mentioned in the Gospel, " Help my unbelief." But what most ensures the accomplishment of our desires, is the union of faith and hope with that correspondence on our part to the will of God, which makes us regulate all our thoughts and actions, and prayers by the standard of his divine law, and the dictates of his sovereign pleasure: " If," says he, " you abide in me, and my words abide in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and it shall be done unto you." In order, however, that all our prayers may be thus graciously heard, we must, as was previously observed, first bury in oblivion all injuries, and cherish sentiments of good will and beneficence towards all men.
The manner of praying is, also, matter of the highest moment. In itself prayer, it is true, is good and salutary; yet, if not applied in a proper manner, it is unavailing: " You ask," says St. James, " and receive not; because you ask amiss. " a The pastor, therefore, will instruct the faithful in the best manner of private and public prayer, and in the rules which have been delivered on this subject, according to the discipline of Christ our Lord. We must, then, pray " in spirit and in truth;" and this we do when our prayers are the aspirations of an interior and intense ardour of soul. This spiritual manner of praying does not exclude the use of vocal prayer; but mental prayer, which is the outpouring of a soul inflamed with the vehemence of heavenly desires, deservedly holds the first place; and, although not uttered with the lips, is heard by Him to whom the secrets of hearts are naked and open. He heard the prayer of Anna, the mother of Samuel, of whom we read, that she prayed, shed ding many " tears and only moving her lips?" Such was, also, the prayer of David, for he says: " My heart hath said to thee, my face hath sought thee;" and in the perusal of the inspired Volume similar examples will frequently occur.
But vocal prayer has also its advantages, and is sometimes necessary: it quickens the attention of the mind, and kindles the fervent devotion of the heart. " We sometimes," says St. Augustine, " animate ourselves to more lively sentiments of devotion, by having recourse to words and other signs calculated to kindle the fervour of our desires; filled with pious emotion we find it impossible to restrain the current of our feelings, and accordingly we pour them out in the fervid accents of prayer; whilst the soul exults with joy, the tongue should also give utterance to that exultation." Vocal prayer, as we know from numerous passages of the Acts of the Apostles, and of the Epistles of St. Paul, was used by the Apostles; and, following their example, it become us also to offer to God the entire sacrifice of soul and body. As, however, there are two sorts of vocal prayer, private and public, it is to be observed, that private prayer is employed in order to assist attention and devotion; whereas, in public prayer, instituted, as it has been, to excite the piety of the faithful, the utterance of the words is, at certain fixed times, indispensably required.
This practice of praying in spirit, a practice, too, peculiar to Christians, is unknown amongst infidels, of whom Christ our Lord has said, " When you pray, speak not much, as the heathens; for they think that in their much speaking they may be heard. Be not you, therefore, like to them, for your Father knoweth what is needful for you before you ask him." He therefore prohibits " much speaking:" but long prayers, which proceed from the eagerness of devotion, and an ardour of soul, that burns with an enduring intensity, he not only does not reject, but on the contrary, recommends by his own example. Not only did he spend whole nights in prayer, but also, " prayed the third time, saying the selfsame words," and the inference, therefore, to be drawn from the prohibition is, that prayers consisting of mere empty sounds are not to be addressed to God.
Neither do the prayers of the hypocrite proceed from the heart; and from the imitation of their example, Christ our Lord deters us in these words: " When ye pray, ye shall not be as the hypocrites that love to stand and pray in the synagogues, and corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men: Amen I say, to you they have received their reward. But thou, when thou shall pray, enter into thy chamber, and having shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret will repay thee." Here the word " chamber" may be understood to mean the human heart, into which it is not enough to enter; it should also be closed against every distrac tion; and then will our Heavenly Father, who sees intuitively our most secret thoughts, hear our prayers, and grant our petitions.
Another necessary condition of prayer is importunity. The great efficacy of incessant solicitation, the Redeemer exemplifies by the conduct of the judge, who, whilst " he feared not God, nor regarded man," yet overcome by the importunity of the widow, yielded to her intreaties. In our prayers to God we should, therefore, be importunate; nor are we to imitate the example of those sluggish souls, who become tired of praying, if, after having prayed once or twice, they succeed not in ob taining the object of their prayers. We should never be weary of a duty, taught us by the authority of Christ our Lord and of his Apostles; and should the mind at any time relax, we should beg of God by prayer the virtue of perseverance.
The Son of God will also have us present our prayers to the Father in his name: for, by his merits and the grace of his mediation, our prayers acquire such weight, that they are heard by our heavenly Father; "Amen, Amen, I say unto you, if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto you have not asked any thing in my name: ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full." " If you shall ask me any thing in my name, that will I do."
in Be it ours, therefore, to emulate the fervour of holy men in prayer; and to prayer let us unite thanksgiving, imitating the example of the Apostles, who, as may be seen in the Epistles of St. Paul, always observed this salutary practice. To prayer let us unite fasting and alms-deeds. Fasting is most intimately connected with prayer: When cloyed with meat and drink, the mind is so pressed down as not to be able to raise itself to the contemplation of God, or comprehend the utility of prayer. Alms-deeds have also an intimate connexion with prayer. What pretension has he to charity, who, blessed with the means of affording relief to those who depend for subsistence on the bounty of others, refuses to stretch forth the hand of mercy to a neighbour and a brother? With what countenance can he, whose heart is devoid of charity, demand assistance from the God of charity, unless he, at the same time, implore the par don of his sins, and humbly beg of God to infuse into his soul the divine virtue of charity? This triple remedy was, therefore, appointed by God to aid man in the attainment of salvation. When we offend God by sin, wrong our neighbour, or injure ourselves, we appease the wrath of God by prayer: by almsdeeds we redeem our offences against man; and by fasting we appease God, and efface from our own souls the stains of sin. Each of these remedies, it is true, is applicable to every sort of sin: they are, however, peculiarly adapted to those which we have specially mentioned.
