Chapter XIV. — Greek Plagiarisms from the Hebrews (part 2 of 3)
“The first, and fourth, and seventh day were held sacred.”
And again:
“And on the seventh the sun’s resplendent orb.”
And Homer:
“And on the seventh then came the sacred day.”
And:
“The seventh was sacred.”
And again:
“It was the seventh day, and all things were accomplished.”
And again:
“And on the seventh morn we leave the stream of Acheron.”
Callimachus the poet also writes:
“It was the seventh morn, and they had all things done.”
And again:
“Among good days is the seventh day, and the seventh race.”
And:
“The seventh is among the prime, and the seventh is perfect.”
And:
“Now all the seven were made in starry heaven, In circles shining as the years appear.”
The Elegies of Solon, too, intensely deify the seventh day.
And how? Is it not similar to Scripture when it says, “Let us remove the righteous man from us, because he is troublesome to us?”[856] when Plato, all but predicting the economy of salvation, says in the second book of the Republic as follows: “Thus he who is constituted just shall be scourged, shall be stretched on the rack, shall be bound, have his eyes put out; and at last, having suffered all evils, shall be crucified.”
And the Socratic Antisthenes, paraphrasing that prophetic utterance, “To whom have ye likened me? saith the Lord,”[857] says that “God is like no one; wherefore no one can come to the knowledge of Him from an image.”
Xenophon too, the Athenian, utters these similar sentiments in the following words: “He who shakes all things, and is Himself immoveable, is manifestly one great and powerful. But what He is in form, appears not. No more does the sun, who wishes to shine in all directions, deem it right to permit any one to look on himself. But if one gaze on him audaciously, he loses his eyesight.”
“What flesh can see with eyes the Heavenly, True, Immortal God, whose dwelling is the poles? Not even before the bright beams of the sun Are men, as being mortal, fit to stand,”—
the Sibyl had said before. Rightly, then, Xenophanes of Colophon, teaching that God is one and incorporeal, adds:
“One God there is, ’midst gods and men supreme; In form, in mind, unlike to mortal men.”
And again:
“But men have the idea that gods are born, And wear their clothes, and have both voice and shape.”
And again:
“But had the oxen or the lions hands, Or could with hands depict a work like men, Were beasts to draw the semblance of the gods, The horses would them like to horses sketch, To oxen, oxen, and their bodies make Of such a shape as to themselves belongs.”
Let us hear, then, the lyric poet Bacchylides speaking of the divine:
“Who to diseases dire[858] never succumb, And blameless are; in nought resembling men.”
And also Cleanthes, the Stoic, who writes thus in a poem on the Deity:[859]
“If you ask what is the nature of the good, listen— That which is regular, just, holy, pious, Self-governing, useful, fair, fitting, Grave, independent, always beneficial, That feels no fear or grief, profitable, painless, Helpful, pleasant, safe, friendly, Held in esteem, agreeing with itself, honourable, Humble, careful, meek, zealous, Perennial, blameless, ever-during.”
And the same, tacitly vilifying the idolatry of the multitude, adds:
“Base is every one who looks to opinion, With the view of deriving any good from it.”
We are not, then, to think of God according to the opinion of the multitude.
“For I do not think that secretly, Imitating the guise of a scoundrel, He would go to thy bed as a man,”
says Amphion to Antiope. And Sophocles plainly writes:
“His mother Zeus espoused, Not in the likeness of gold, nor covered With swan’s plumage, as the Pluronian girl He impregnated; but an out and out man.”
He further proceeds, and adds:
“And quick the adulterer stood on the bridal steps.”
Then he details still more plainly the licentiousness of the fabled Zeus:
“But he nor food nor cleansing water touched, But heart-stung went to bed, and that whole night Wantoned.”
But let these be resigned to the follies of the theatre.
Heraclitus plainly says: “But of the word which is eternal men are not able to understand, both before they have heard it, and on first hearing it.” And the lyrist Melanippides says in song:
“Hear me, O Father, Wonder of men, Ruler of the ever-living soul.”
And Parmenides the great, as Plato says in the Sophist, writes of God thus:
“Very much, since unborn and indestructible He is, Whole, only-begotten, and immoveable, and unoriginated.”
Hesiod also says:
“For He of the immortals all is King and Lord. With God[860] none else in might may strive.”
Nay more, Tragedy, drawing away from idols, teaches to look up to heaven. Sophocles, as Hecatæus, who composed the histories in the work about Abraham and the Egyptians, says, exclaims plainly on the stage:
“One in very truth, God is One, Who made the heaven and the far-stretching earth, The Deep’s blue billow, and the might of winds. But of us mortals, many erring far In heart, as solace for our woes, have raised Images of gods—of stone, or else of brass, Or figures wrought of gold or ivory; And sacrifices and vain festivals To these appointing, deem ourselves devout.”
And Euripides on the stage, in tragedy, says:
“Dost thou this lofty, boundless Ether see, Which holds the earth around in the embrace Of humid arms? This reckon Zeus, And this regard as God.”
And in the drama of Pirithous, the same writes those lines in tragic vein:
“Thee, self-sprung, who on Ether’s wheel Hast universal nature spun, Around whom Light and dusky spangled Night, The countless host of stars, too, ceaseless dance.”
For there he says that the creative mind is self-sprung. What follows applies to the universe, in which are the opposites of light and darkness.
Æschylus also, the son of Euphorion, says with very great solemnity of God:
“Ether is Zeus, Zeus earth, and Zeus the heaven; The universe is Zeus, and all above.”
I am aware that Plato assents to Heraclitus, who writes: “The one thing that is wise alone will not be expressed, and means the name of Zeus.” And again, “Law is to obey the will of one.” And if you wish to adduce that saying, “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” you will find it expressed by the Ephesian[861] to the following effect: “Those that hear without understanding are like the deaf. The proverb witnesses against them, that when present they are absent.”
But do you want to hear from the Greeks expressly of one first principle? Timæus the Locrian, in the work on Nature, shall testify in the following words: “There is one first principle of all things unoriginated. For were it originated, it would be no longer the first principle; but the first principle would be that from which it originated.” For this true opinion was derived from what follows: “Hear,” it is said, “O Israel; the Lord thy God is one, and Him only shalt thou serve.”[862]
“Lo[863] He all sure and all unerring is,”
says the Sibyl.
Homer also manifestly mentions the Father and the Son by a happy hit of divination in the following words:
“If Outis,[864] alone as thou art, offers thee violence, And there is no escaping disease sent by Zeus, For the Cyclops heed not Ægis-bearing Zeus.”[865]
And before him Orpheus said, speaking of the point in hand:
“Son of great Zeus, Father of Ægis-bearing Zeus.”
And Xenocrates the Chalcedonian, who mentions the supreme Zeus and the inferior Zeus, leaves an indication of the Father and the Son. Homer, while representing the gods as subject to human passions, appears to know the Divine Being, whom Epicurus does not so revere. He says accordingly:
“Why, son of Peleus, mortal as thou art, With swift feet me pursuest, a god Immortal? Hast thou not yet known That I am a god?”[866]
For he shows that the Divinity cannot be captured by a mortal, or apprehended either with feet, or hands, or eyes, or by the body at all. “To whom have ye likened the Lord? or to what likeness have ye likened Him?” says the Scripture.[867] Has not the artificer made the image? or the goldsmith, melting the gold, has gilded it, and what follows.
The comic poet Epicharmus speaks in the Republic clearly of the Word in the following terms:
“The life of men needs calculation and number alone, And we live by number and calculation, for these save mortals.”[868]
He then adds expressly:
“Reason governs mortals, and alone preserves manners.”
Then:
“There is in man reasoning; and there is a divine Reason.[869] Reason is implanted in man to provide for life and sustenance, But divine Reason attends the arts in the case of all, Teaching them always what it is advantageous to do. For it was not man that discovered art, but God brought it; And the Reason of man derives its origin from the divine Reason.”
The Spirit also cries by Isaiah: “Wherefore the multitude of sacrifices? saith the Lord. I am full of holocausts of rams, and the fat of lambs and the blood of bulls I wish not;” and a little after adds: “Wash you, and be clean. Put away wickedness from your souls,”[870] and so forth.
Menander, the comic poet, writes in these very words:
“If one by offering sacrifice, a crowd Of bulls or kids, O Pamphilus, by Zeus, Or such like things; by making works of art, Garments of gold or purple, images Of ivory or emerald, deems by these God can be made propitious, he does err, And has an empty mind. For the man must prove A man of worth, who neither maids deflowers, Nor an adulterer is, nor steals, nor kills For love of worldly wealth, O Pamphilus. Nay, covet not a needle’s thread. For God Thee sees, being near beside thee.”...[871]
“I am a God at hand,” it is said by Jeremiah,[872] “and not a God afar off. Shall a man do aught in secret places, and I shall not see him?”
And again Menander, paraphrasing that scripture, “Sacrifice a sacrifice of righteousness, and trust in the Lord,”[873] thus writes:
“And not a needle even that is Another’s ever covet, dearest friend; For God in righteous works delights, and so Permits him to increase his worldly wealth, Who toils, and ploughs the land both night and day. But sacrifice to God, and righteous be, Shining not in bright robes, but in thy heart; And when thou hear’st the thunder, do not flee, Being conscious to thyself of nought amiss, Good sir, for thee God ever present sees.”[874]
“Whilst thou art yet speaking,” says the Scripture, “I will say, Lo, here I am.”[875]
Again Diphilus, the comic poet, discourses as follows on the judgment:
“Think’st thou, O Niceratus, that the dead, Who in all kinds of luxury in life have shared, Escape the Deity, as if forgot. There is an eye of justice, which sees all. For two ways, as we deem, to Hades lead— One for the good, the other for the bad. But if the earth hides both for ever, then Go plunder, steal, rob, and be turbulent. But err not. For in Hades judgment is, Which God the Lord of all will execute, Whose name too dreadful is for me to name, Who gives to sinners length of earthly life. If any mortal thinks, that day by day, While doing ill, he eludes the gods’ keen sight, His thoughts are evil; and when justice has The leisure, he shall then detected be So thinking. Look, whoe’er you be that say That there is not a God. There is, there is. If one, by nature evil, evil does, Let him redeem the time; for such as he Shall by and by due punishment receive.”[876]
And with this agrees the tragedy[877] in the following lines:
“For there shall come, shall come[878] that point of time, When Ether, golden-eyed, shall ope its store Of treasured fire; and the devouring flame, Raging, shall burn all things on earth below, And all above.”...
And after a little he adds:
“And when the whole world fades, And vanished all the abyss of ocean’s waves, And earth of trees is bare; and wrapt in flames, The air no more begets the winged tribes; Then He who all destroyed, shall all restore.”
We shall find expressions similar to these also in the Orphic hymns, written as follows:
“For having hidden all, brought them again To gladsome light, forth from his sacred heart, Solicitous.”
And if we live throughout holily and righteously, we are happy here, and shall be happier after our departure hence; not possessing happiness for a time, but enabled to rest in eternity.
“At the same hearth and table as the rest Of the immortal gods, we sit all free Of human ills, unharmed,”
says the philosophic poetry of Empedocles. And so, according to the Greeks, none is so great as to be above judgment, none so insignificant as to escape its notice.
And the same Orpheus speaks thus:
“But to the word divine, looking, attend, Keeping aright the heart’s receptacle Of intellect, and tread the straight path well, And only to the world’s immortal King Direct thy gaze.”[879]
And again, respecting God, saying that He was invisible, and that He was known to but one, a Chaldean by race—meaning either by this Abraham or his son—he speaks as follows:
“But one a scion of Chaldean race; For he the sun’s path knew right well, And how the motion of the sphere about The earth proceeds, in circle moving Equally around its axis, how the winds Their chariot guide o’er air and sea.”
Then, as if paraphrasing the expression, “Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool,”[880] he adds:
“But in great heaven, He is seated firm Upon a throne of gold, and ’neath His feet The earth. His right hand round the ocean’s bound He stretches; and the hills’ foundations shake To the centre at His wrath, nor can endure His mighty strength. He all celestial is, And all things finishes upon the earth. He the Beginning, Middle is, and End. But Thee I dare not speak. In limbs And mind I tremble. He rules from on high.”
And so forth. For in these he indicates these prophetic utterances: “If Thou openest the heaven, trembling shall seize the mountains from Thy presence; and they shall melt, as wax melteth before the fire;”[881] and in Isaiah, “Who hath measured the heaven with a span, and the whole earth with His fist?”[882] Again, when it is said:
“Ruler of Ether, Hades, Sea, and Land, Who with Thy bolts Olympus’ strong-built home Dost shake. Whom demons dread, and whom the throng Of gods do fear. Whom, too, the Fates obey, Relentless though they be. O deathless One, Our mother’s Sire! whose wrath makes all things reel; Who mov’st the winds, and shroud’st in clouds the world, Broad Ether cleaving with Thy lightning gleams,— Thine is the order ’mongst the stars, which run As Thine unchangeable behests direct. Before Thy burning throne the angels wait, Much-working, charged to do all things for men. Thy young Spring shines, all prank’d with purple flowers; Thy Winter with its chilling clouds assails; Thine Autumn noisy Bacchus distributes.”
Then he adds, naming expressly the Almighty God:
“Deathless Immortal, capable of being To the immortals only uttered! Come, Greatest of gods, with strong Necessity. Dread, invincible, great, deathless One, Whom Ether crowns.”...
By the expression “Sire of our Mother” (μητροπάτωρ) he not only intimates creation out of nothing, but gives occasion to those who introduce emissions of imagining a consort of the Deity. And he paraphrases those prophetic Scriptures—that in Isaiah, “I am He that fixes the thunder, and creates the wind; whose hands have founded the host of heaven;”[883] and that in Moses, “Behold, behold that I am He, and there is no god beside me: I will kill, and I will make to live; I will smite, and I will heal: and there is none that shall deliver out of my hands.”[884]
“And He, from good, to mortals planteth ill, And cruel war, and tearful woes,”
according to Orpheus.
Such also are the words of the Parian Archilochus:
“O Zeus, thine is the power of heaven, and thou Inflict’st on men things violent and wrong.”[885]
Again let the Thracian Orpheus sing to us:
“His right hand all around to ocean’s bound He stretches; and beneath His feet is earth.”
These are plainly derived from the following: “The Lord will save the inhabited cities, and grasp the whole land in His hand like a nest;”[886] “It is the Lord that made the earth by His power,” as saith Jeremiah, “and set up the earth by His wisdom.”[887] Further, in addition to these, Phocylides, who calls the angels demons, explains in the following words that some of them are good, and others bad (for we also have learned that some are apostate):
“Demons there are—some here, some there—set over men; Some, on man’s entrance [into life], to ward off ill.”
Rightly, then, also Philemon, the comic poet, demolishes idolatry in these words:
“Fortune is no divinity to us: There’s no such god. But what befalls by chance And of itself to each, is Fortune called.”
And Sophocles the tragedian says:
“Not even the gods have all things as they choose, Excepting Zeus; for he beginning is and end.”
And Orpheus:
“One Might, the great, the flaming heaven, was One Deity. All things one Being were; in whom All these revolve fire, water, and the earth.”
And so forth.
Pindar, the lyric poet, as if in Bacchic frenzy, plainly says:
“What is God? The All.”
And again:
“God, who makes all mortals.”
And when he says,
“How little, being a man, dost thou expect Wisdom for man? ’Tis hard for mortal mind The counsels of the gods to scan; and thou Wast of a mortal mother born,”
he drew the thought from the following: “Who hath known the mind of the Lord, or who was His counsellor?”[888] Hesiod, too, agrees with what is said above, in what he writes:
“No prophet, sprung of men that dwell on earth, Can know the mind of Ægis-bearing Zeus.”
Similarly, then, Solon the Athenian, in the Elegies, following Hesiod, writes:
“The Immortal’s mind to men is quite unknown.”
Again Moses, having prophesied that the woman would bring forth in trouble and pain, on account of transgression, a poet not undistinguished writes:
“Never by day From toil and woe shall they have rest, nor yet By night from groans. Sad cares the gods to men Shall give.”
Further, when Homer says,
“The Sire himself the golden balance held,”[889]
he intimates that God is just.
And Menander, the comic poet, in exhibiting God, says:
“To each man, on his birth, there is assigned A tutelary Demon, as his life’s good guide. For that the Demon evil is, and harms A good life, is not to be thought.”
Then he adds:
“Ἅπαντα δ’ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι τὸν Θεόν,”—
meaning either “that every one good is God,” or, what is preferable, “that God in all things is good.”
Again, Æschylus the tragedian, setting forth the power of God, does not shrink from calling Him the Highest in these words:
“Place God apart from mortals; and think not That He is, like thyself, corporeal. Thou know’st Him not. Now He appears as fire, Dread force; as water now; and now as gloom; And in the beasts is dimly shadowed forth, In wind, and cloud, in lightning, thunder, rain; And minister to Him the seas and rocks, Each fountain and the water’s floods and streams. The mountains tremble, and the earth, the vast Abyss of sea, and towering height of hills, When on them looks the Sovereign’s awful eye: Almighty is the glory of the Most High God.”[890]
Does he not seem to you to paraphrase that text, “At the presence of the Lord the earth trembles?”[891] In addition to these, the most prophetic Apollo is compelled—thus testifying to the glory of God—to say of Athene, when the Medes made war against Greece, that she besought and supplicated Zeus for Attica. The oracle is as follows:
“Pallas cannot Olympian Zeus propitiate, Although with many words and sage advice she prays; But he will give to the devouring fire many temples of the immortals, Who now stand shaking with terror, and bathed in sweat;”[892]
and so forth.
Thearidas, in his book On Nature, writes: “There was then one really true beginning [first principle] of all that exists—one. For that Being in the beginning is one and alone.”
“Nor is there any other except the Great King,”
says Orpheus. In accordance with whom, the comic poet Diphilus says very sententiously,[893] the
“Father of all, To Him alone incessant reverence pay, The inventor and the author of such blessings.”
Rightly therefore Plato “accustoms the best natures to attain to that study which formerly we said was the highest, both to see the good and to accomplish that ascent. And this, as appears, is not the throwing of the potsherds;[894] but the turning round of the soul from a nocturnal day to that which is a true return to that which really is, which we shall assert to be the true philosophy.” Such as are partakers of this he judges[895] to belong to the golden race, when he says: “Ye are all brethren; and those who are of the golden race are most capable of judging most accurately in every respect.”[896]
The Father, then, and Maker of all things is apprehended by all things, agreeably to all, by innate power and without teaching,—things inanimate, sympathizing with the animate creation; and of living beings some are already immortal, working in the light of day. But of those that are still mortal, some are in fear, and carried still in their mother’s womb; and others regulate themselves by their own independent reason. And of men all are Greeks and Barbarians. But no race anywhere of tillers of the soil, or nomads, and not even of dwellers in cities, can live, without being imbued with the faith of a superior being. Wherefore every eastern nation, and every nation touching the western shores; or the north, and each one towards the south,[897]—all have one and the same preconception respecting Him who hath appointed government; since the most universal of His operations equally pervade all. Much more did the philosophers among the Greeks, devoted to investigation, starting from the Barbarian philosophy, attribute providence[898] to the “Invisible, and sole, and most powerful, and most skilful and supreme cause of all things most beautiful;”—not knowing the inferences from these truths, unless instructed by us, and not even how God is to be known naturally; but only, as we have already often said, by a true periphrasis.[899] Rightly therefore the apostle says, “Is He the God of the Jews only, and not also of the Greeks?”—not only saying prophetically that of the Greeks believing Greeks would know God; but also intimating that in power the Lord is the God of all, and truly Universal King. For they know neither what He is, nor how He is Lord, and Father, and Maker, nor the rest of the system of the truth, without being taught by it. Thus also the prophetic utterances have the same force as the apostolic word. For Isaiah says: “If ye say, We trust in the Lord our God: now make an alliance with my lord the king of the Assyrians.” And he adds: “And now, was it without the Lord that we came up to this land to make war against it?”[900] And Jonah, himself a prophet, intimates the same thing in what he says: “And the shipmaster came to him, and said to him, Why dost thou snore? Rise, call on thy God, that He may save us, and that we may not perish.”[901] For the expression “thy God” he makes as if to one who knew Him by way of knowledge; and the expression, “that God may save us,” revealed the consciousness in the minds of heathens who had applied their mind to the Ruler of all, but had not yet believed. And again the same: “And he said to them, I am the servant of the Lord; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven.” And again the same: “And he said, Let us by no means perish for the life of this man.” And Malachi the prophet plainly exhibits God saying, “I will not accept sacrifice at your hands. For from the rising of the sun to its going down, my name is glorified among the Gentiles; and in every place sacrifice is offered to me.”[902] And again: “Because I am a great King, saith the Lord omnipotent; and my name is manifest among the nations.” What name? The Son declaring the Father among the Greeks who have believed.
